[The Polyester Prince by Hamish McDonald](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/265513.The_Polyester_Prince)


**The Polyester Prince** by Hamish McDonald is a reportedly "uncensored" account of the rise of Dhirubhai Ambani and Reliance Industries from the 1960s to the 2000s. McDonald traces the growth and eventual domination of Reliance Industries through its bold, but often brazenly corrupt practices which capitulated Reliance to the top of India's industrial pyramid. 

Dhirubhai uses every technique in the crooked capitalist's book to ensure his wild race to the top remains unencumbered. Whether it be blatant corruption, political funding, subverting laws using loopholes, using political and financial arm-twisting to secure bank funds for his ventures, manipulating the Reliance stock prices and its gullible investors, he plows through every barrier in his path using the double barrels of capital and political influence.

McDonald points out the immense influence that Dhirubhai enjoyed with the core members of Indira Gandhi's cabinet and their support in his rise. The fact that he was able to smuggle an entire textile plant's machinery right through the customs of the License Raj era shows the immense clout he wielded. And Indira's successor Rajiv Gandhi (probably India's worst PM?), although initially reluctant in all his dealings with Dhirubhai and Reliance, eventually succumbs and plays to Reliance's tunes, bending legislations, passing new regulations tailored to support Dhirubhai's new ventures like investments into industries manufacturing PVC and related products using the petrochemical plant at Hazira (which itself was given prominence by diverting funds from public sector investments). V.P Singh, the Janata Dal PM, tries to tighten the noose on Reliance, but unfortunately is ousted through carefully orchestrated political manoeuvres. 

The subtle attempt at a takeover of a majority stake in L&T by Reliance to harness their engineering expertise for Reliance's petroleum refinery ventures by first diverting the stakes through govt machineries like UTI, LIC and Bank Of Baroda, and then subsequently transferring it to Reliance's account is highlighted by McDonald. Also explained in great detail are the workings of the numerous domestic and international shell companies which Reliance used to manipulate the workings of the stock market and ensure its dominance in the BSE as well. And when some of these manipulations were identified and actions initiated against it, the company tried to arm-twist the Index by threatening to withdraw its listing, although the company had to eventually back out from this threat to save face.

Dhirubhai's attempt at trying to control the media narrative is also a widely discussed topic in the book. His initial attempts to get into the good books of Goenka's *Indian Express* fails, and the IE becomes his dreaded nemesis, churning out report after report criticising Reliance's, and the Congress government's manipulative actions. S. Gurumurthy, the RSS idealogue was instrumental in researching and bringing out these scathing reports on Reliance and eventually faces harassment due to it. Reliance tries to legally suppress negative media reports through legal actions on several instances, although many turn out to be unsuccessful attempts.

Also discussed are Dhirubhai's professional/personal vendetta with Bombay Dyeing's Nusli Wadia, which at one point reaches the level of an assassination plot against Wadia by one of Reliance's middle-managers, although this is eventually downplayed by the investigating CBI. It is worth mentioning that it is clear from several instances that the then CBI director Mohan Katre was in collusion with Ambani, and helped him out on many instances through his connections.

One thing that Dhirubhai almost always succeeds in manipulating well is the average Reliance investor's mindset. The descriptions of his AGMs, the confidence he instills in even the smallest shareholders by playing to the gallery, citing his humble roots and projecting that the people that are against his rise to power are actually jealous of a small-town guy climbing the ladder to challenge industry doyens, all are actually a testament to Dhirubhai's immense skills as one of the best salesmen in business.

Overall, a really interesting book which tries to lay bare the triumphs and casualties in Reliance Industries', and thereby Dhirubhai Ambani's growth to the top. Several instances are eerily similar to the current rise of the Adani Group, whether it be the political support, lax regulation, stock manipulation and several other incidents. The ' Great Indian Growth Story' has conveniently been used to hide the dark underbelly of the Capitalistic beast that is the Indian Industry.



---
---
*Disclaimer: The content shared on this blog, including quotes and highlights from books, is intended for educational and informational purposes only. All rights to the original works are retained by the respective copyright holders. This blog does not claim ownership of any copyrighted material. If you are the copyright owner and believe that any content posted here infringes upon your rights, please contact us, and we will promptly remove the material in question.*
