[Who Wrote the Bhagavadgita: A Secular Enquiry into a Sacred Text (Meghnad Desai)](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/21454853-who-wrote-the-bhagavadgita)



#### Arjuna's Problem 
- Whether we have the Gita or not, the outcome is the same. Families are destroyed and the kula is ruined. Arjuna’s fears are realized after he obeys Krishna. This is a situation in which whatever Krishna said or did not say, ruin was inevitable. And so it occurred where everyone except about ten people survived in the war. Heads you lose and tails you lose as well.
- ##### Krishna’s response to Arjuna
	- ###### Irrelevance of Agency
		- This is then a ‘get-out-of-jail free’ card from the Lord himself. You don’t kill and are not killed. The body is transient and the soul cannot kill or be killed. So there are no consequences of human action. One can regard this as a deep doctrine as many do or as a fantastic escapism.
		- The soul is unseen and difficult to prove to exist at all. The body is, alas, far too solid to be ignored and bleeds when attacked by sharp weapons. By shifting the argument from what exists to what may or may not exist, the responsibility of human physical action is completely evaded.

	- ###### Humiliation of the Ego
		- This is a conventional argument in which Krishna uses the logic thar Dhritarashtra and Bhishma have already been quoted above as using. Arjuna had objected that killing and destruction of the kin group could be adharma (1.39). This could lead to sin (1.36). Krishna now changes tack and talks of svadharma which overrides any general concern for dharma. Svadharma for a Kshatriya is to fight and not brood over consequences of killing.
		- So, if there was a historic event such as the Mahabharata war, whatever its scale, and if there were historic characters such as Krishna and Arjuna, it would make sense that ,  Krishna would give a short, sharp pep talk  to motivate Arjuna. The rest is philosophy.
		- Krishna does not tell him to fight because his cause is just; only because his duty as a Kshatriya is to fight, regardless, one presumes, of the rightness or otherwise of the cause. It may be dharmakshetra, but the only dharma is the svadharma of a Kshatriya to kill. But, if so, then all battlefields -where Kshatriyas fought each other are dharmakshetras by definition.


#### The Authorship of the Gita 
- It is my argument that the Gita as it finally came to us is the result of many additions to what could have been a small original fragment.
- Vivekananda wrote: *"Another fact comes to the fore is that in the olden days as one sect after another arose, there also came into existence and use among them one new scripture or another. It happened too that in the lapse of time both the sect and its scripture died out or the sect ceased to exist but its scripture remained. Similarly it was quite probable that the Gita was the scripture of such a sect which had embodied its high and noble ideas in this sacred book."*
- The idea that the Gita may be a multiple-authored book is not new.
	- For Holtzmann, the theistic parts belong to a more recent layer, which he describes as the “Vishnuistic revision” of an original “pantheistic” text that teaches Brahman as salvation. This revision was motivated by a historical context and took place at a time when the Brahmins were interested in reconciling their polytheism with folk belief, in order to take up the fight against Buddhism (Holtzmann, 1892-95: II: 163f).
	- Deussen divided the text into three thematic units, (1) ethics (Chapters 1-6); (2) metaphysics (Chapters 7-12); and (3) psychology (Chapters | 13-18).
	- The French scholar Charpentier believed that what | follows 2.38 ‘can in no wise have belonged to the original epic text’
	- Macovich ‘regards the Gita as a text that was composed independently of the epic and interpolated into the Mahabharata between the fifth and the third centuries BCE.
	- G. von Simpson, argues that the Gita was as Incorporated in the epic for apologetic reasons, that is, to justify the "mean tricks" that brought victory of the Pandavas.
- The most cogent argument for multiple authorship of the Gita, in my view, was made by the Maharashtrian scholar Dr Gajanan Shripat Khair. Khair's core argument, after a deep textual analysis of the Gita, is that there are three different styles in the Gita. He can trace the styles of these three authors and suggests a division of the text into three parts. These parts are:
	1. The first author wrote most of the Chapters 1-6. The : period of writing was of the older Upanishads and pre- Buddhist, around 600 BCE. The principal philosophical issue ais sanyasa and the solution is karma-yoga (126 verses or 18%).
	2. The second author wrote portions of Chapter 8, Chapters 13-15, 17 and portions of Chapter 18. The period was - contemporaneous with the Buddha and the philosophical authority is the old Upanishads as before. The problem is karma — choice as Khair describes it — and the solution is sattvikatva (119 verses or 17%).
	3. The third author is the editor and the final arbiter of the document. He wrote the entire Chapters 7, 9-16, plus interpolated in the chapters the other two wrote. The problem is 'diverse creeds' and the answer is bhakti. His authority is the newer Upanishads and his period is 300 to 200 BCE (455 verses or 65%). He argues that the third author mixed up the different parts which disguises the divisions. His chapters are integral and they are largely about bhakti. His style puts Krishna in the first person narrative mode much more than the other two authors do
- The ideas common to Kosambi and Khair are that (a) there are multiple authors and (b) the text evolves over time as it responds to different circumstances prevailing as per the struggle between Buddhism and Brahmanism, while Khair alone contributes the idea that the third author adds to and edits the text to give it a sort of unity.
- One of the signs of changing authorship is the use of first person singular by Kishna. It is rare in the first six chapters but from the seventh to the twelfth it is ubiquitous. It would seem that it is the third author who introduces bhakti. He also interpolates various first person singular expressions in the writing of the two other authors.
- Khair sees a pattern in the way Arjuna is exhorted. In the first author's portions the appeal to stand up and fight is not mentioned beyond the second chapter. The second author uses the words *listen, understand, know* repeatedly. It is the third author who has the fighting talk and exhortation to Arjuna which are inspiring. Thus Khair cites 'Destroy the enemy and enjoy this prosperous kingdom', 'Fight, victory is yours; therefore arise and be victorious'. The third author also has phrases where Arjuna is told to surrender to Krishna much more frequently - Come unto me, be devoted to me, etc.
- Khair argues that over time the Gita was addressed to different audiences. The first author was writing for a learned and high-class audience. 'The nature of his composition, therefore, is highly intellectual.’ This makes sense if we see that the first author is not joining a battle against Buddhism but expounding the Upanishadic doctrine in a concise way.
- The second author is a contemporary of Buddha if we are to take Khair’s dating seriously. He is also a didactic writer expounding what has to be learnt. His style is dispassionate. This is also a teaching text, meant for select audiences.
- It is the third author who addresses the ordinary people who have little time and inclination for philosophical subtleties. As Khair says, ‘His main audience is the common people and the neglected persons, who were deprived of opportunities of spiritual and moral salvation. Traders, merchants, atheists, worshippers of ancestral and popular gods – this was his audience.’ By this time the need to spread Brahmanism as widely as possible to counter Buddhism’s popularity is urgent. The second or third century BCE, which Khair gives as the likely date is the high point of spread of Buddhism with Ashoka having given royal patronage to it.
- The champions of Brahmanism had to fight back. The Gita with a popularized section moulded along with the earlier parts was to be the weapon. The date suggested by Kosambi of 150–350 CE would be even more suitable because under the Guptas, the Brahmanical fightback had royal patronage. As Gonzalez-Reimann has said in a recent book: _When the Mauryan Emperor As’oka embraced and showed respect for other sects, he legitimized and empowered the heterodox movements. And after the fall of the Mauryas, successive foreign incursions shook the brahmanic establishment, which, with the exceptions of some brief periods of political favour, had to struggle in order to keep its influence on society. When the Guptas arrived on the scene, they fostered the return of political and religious power into the hands of the brahmana class, and this allowed for the revival of brahmanic religious ideas and the establishment of what we now call Hinduism. It was the result of a long period of transition during which Vedic brahmanic religious ideas were transformed and updated, and non-Vedic ideas and beliefs were incorporated into the brahmanic fold as a reaction to changing social, religious and economic conditions._
 
- Chapter 11 has the famous Vishwarupa of Krishna being shown to Arjuna. The Vishwarupa is a high point of the Gita. Many readers of the Gita who are not familiar with the Mahabharata believe it is unique to the Gita. But there are two other examples of the cosmic form being displayed.
	- One of them is by Krishna himself when Duryodhana tries to arrest him during the parleys described in the Udyoga Parva [Mbh. 54.129], seen by the Kauravas with Vidura and Dhritarshtra present in the court along with Duryodhana and his brothers. The Vishwarupa is thus not just Arjuna’s privilege to see.
	- Kosambi argues that the Vishwarupa of the Gita is derivative of the episode in the Aranya Parva of Mahabharata where Yudhishthira is also shown a Vishwarupa by a rishi. This is in the Aranya Parva.
	
	It would have been possible for the third author to borrow from this and develop the vision. Of course, the Gita version is much better known than the one in the Aranya Parva or in the Udyoga Parva and is more poetic.

- There are several passages in the Gita which it is not very easy to reconcile with one another; and no attempt is made to harmonise them.

##### Conclusions about Trikala Gita
- We can say that the three Gitas were:
	1. The Veda-Vedanta Gita or Karma Yoga Gita of the first author mainly across Chapters 2 to 6;
	2. The Sankhya Gita or Jnana Yoga Gita of the second author, Chapters 8 (part), 13–15, 17 and 18 (part); and
	3. The Bhakti Yoga Gita of the third author, Chapters 7 and 9-12.

	These then are the three separate Gitas which once may have been separate expositions of doctrine for students but were put together by the third author to make the Bhagavadgita what it is today. To this we must add interpolations by the third author. The most remarkable are 1.38-44 containing Arjuna’s remarks about kulakshaya and women misbehaving after death of their husbands; 2.54-72, the beautiful passage about sthitaprajna. There are numerous others but these are the most noticeable.
- What was the need for incorporating the various philosophies prevalent into a narrative of Arjuna’s confusion and why did it take the form of Krishna’s discourse. Here again I would separate what I label as Arjuna’s Gita, which is probably the original account of what could have happened on the battlefield itself. But the subsequent elaboration took a long time and was a response to the challenge of Buddhism. The Gita is an evolving response which deals with the conflicts between Veda and Vedanta and then with the challenge posed to Vedanta by Buddhism. Its shift to Bhakti is thus the climax of the battle between Brahmanism and Buddhism.
- There is ample evidence that Buddhism in its early days took a lot from the Upanishads and later gave back into the philosophical doctrines of Brahmanism much that is now an essential part thereof – the doctrine of the cycle of karma and rebirth, the doctrine of nirvana, etc.
- The important point is that the battle between the two was waged on the social terrain as much as the religious one. Buddhism rejected varna distinctions, challenged the hegemony of Brahmins and the necessity of ritual performance. It doubted the existence of a God and of the soul. Its challenge to the Brahmanical social order was the most profound revolutionary challenge to the old order. Urban groups, mainly Vaishyas and Shudras, joined Buddhism in large numbers. For around 500 years between the death of Buddha and the advent of the Common Era, Buddhism shaped the social order in parts of India, north and south. The recapture of the initiative by Brahmanism, which took place during the first 700 years of the Common Era, was achieved as much by the religious and philosophical debates as by the contest for patronage from one or the other king. While some kings supported both the religions, there was much conflict physical as well as intellectual in the defeat of Buddhism by Brahmanism.
- When Buddhism was defeated and left India for other Asian regions, the caste society was re-established firmly in India. Buddhism was wiped out from the historical memory of India till James Prinsep inaugurated the rediscovery of Buddhism by deciphering the Brahmi script. The reconsecration of Buddhist places of worship such as Rajgir could only be undertaken then. We now know much more about Buddhism and its place in Indian history but that is no thanks to Brahmanism which suppressed all memory of the challenge.
- The Bhagavadgita was a most effective instrument in this struggle. It offered a simple, easy to read or recite, source of philosophical ideas of Brahmanism. It lent authority to these verses by attributing them to Krishna whose bhakti became a powerful instrument for winning over the masses to the cause of Brahmanism. All this happened over 1,000 years and more. We still lack a proper history of the rise and fall of Buddhism and the decline and renaissance of Brahmanism.
---
#### Contemporary Relevance of the Bhagavadgita
- The Bhagavadgita is foremost in the texts which are said to be influential on the behaviour of Indians. If so, can we make any connection between the exhortation of the sacred texts and the profane outcome of corruption in public and private life?
- The Gita is a book which explicitly offers a divine sanction for the varna system in 4.13. There have been attempts to argue that the present-day varna system is a distortion of the original one. Indeed, the verse quoted above is cited as saying that varnas are determined by guna and karma. Yet the Gita itself contradicts this benevolent interpretation of the varna system in Chapter 18. The two top varnas are described by their qualities – gunas – as constituting their svabhava. But when it comes to the lower two – ‘the working classes’ – they are described not by any qualities but by the work they perform. No heroism, no high spirit, no self-control or candour for the lower orders. They do not have gunas; they are just beasts of burden. Thus the varna system may have been constructed gunakarma vibhagashah but there are only karmas for the producing classes and gunas for the leisure classes. Of course, one needs to also point out that the Lord does not claim to have created those beyond the chaturvarna system – the Dalits, or pariahs or untouchables or the tribals
- 9.32: Those who take refuge with Me, O Partha, ***though outcastes, born from a womb of sin, women, Vaishyas, even Shudras***, they also attain to the highest goal. This is one of only two verses where women get a mention at all in the Gita. The other is Arjuna’s worry that women will get into unsuitable liaisons with men of lower varna if kulanyasha takes place. We should note en passant that the verses are by the third author.
- The paradox of a system based on heredity but purporting to be based on merit (guna) and tasks (karma) has been noticed as an anomaly. The way the guna/karma logic has been reconciled is by interpreting karma as a theory of reward via rebirth. If you are meritorious in this life, despite being a Shudra, you will rise up in your next birth to be somewhat better. But since rebirth is never empirically verifiable, it is a belief system which will suit the upper castes to propagate as it gives a double justification of their status – not only are they born Brahmin but thanks to past deeds they deserve to be so.
- It is interesting in this matter to note that the doctrine of karma originates in Buddhism but as a way of explaining why pain, illness and death persist. It is unconnected to assigning social position in future lives. Brahmanism borrows the karma doctrine and turns it into a weapon for reinforcing caste hierarchy and makes it fatalistic.
- ##### The People outside the Varna System
	- Even if we do not consider the modern categories of Dalits, even within the Mahabharata, the Nagas are crucial to the storyline at various points. Of course, the Nagas are human beings who have the cobra as their totem. The Nagas are obviously non-Aryan and thus outside the varna system. Indeed the antagonism between the Aryans and Nagas is a subtext in the story. The entire Mahabharata story is driven by the war against the Nagas which Janamejaya launches as a revenge against his father’s death, which itself is a revenge for the burning of the forest by Krishna and Arjuna where Indraprastha was going to be built.
	- The Nagas are hunter-gatherers, but slowly they are staking out territory and thus coming into conflict with the pastoralist Aryans. [Balarama with his plough is an indication of the transition of the Aryans from pastoralism to agriculture.] But the Aryans are as puzzled and somewhat mystified by the Nagas as they are antagonistic. Hence the stories within Mahabharata are sometimes of cooperation with the Nagas as well. Thus the Naga presence is felt when Arjuna is inadvertently killed by his son Babhruvahana and his mother Ulupi fetches the mysterious jewel from the Great Cobra who lives in the underworld to revive Arjuna. Ulupi is herself of the Kauravya Naga line. On another occasion, Bhima is rescued by Nagas after he has been poisoned and thrown into the river by his Kaurava cousins.
- ##### Devas and Asuras
	- Yet the most troubling chapter in the Gita is Chapter 16. This is, by Khair’s account a work of the third author. The sixteenth chapter sets up a Manichean distinction between devas and asuras. Who then are these two groups? Why, in the middle of a philosophical exposition of karma, jnana and bhakti, do we need a sermon on the distinction between gods and demons? 
	- It is when we go further into the description of the asuric nature that we see that the opposition is about the nature of religious beliefs. The asuras are not, as in Vedic times, the people of foreign lands but the local disbelievers. it is possible for us to recover at least two interesting indications about the asura-view from this heap of abuses and slanders in Ch 16. The first implied that the asuras had a definite cosmogony and the second that they had distinct forms of ritual practice.
	- the point is clear that those who do not abide by the shastras, deny the existence of God and attribute the creation of the world to sensual pleasures are asuric. The lines were drawn. Those who denied the divinity of Krishna and the authority of the shastras were the benighted asuras. They were the Buddhists, Jains and the non-Aryan devotees of the original Sankhya philosophy. The Gita does in certain parts attempt to reconcile Sankhya and Vedanta, as the portions attributed to the second author show. But by the time of the third author the distinction is tightly drawn and only those totally devoted to Brahmanism can be labelled daivic.

- ##### The Gita as a Guide to Personal Behaviour
	- For many readers of the Gita, and indeed even many who have not read it, the essence of the Gita is in the message of nishkama karma. It is in the much cited sloka 2.47:
		
> karmanye vadhikaraste, ma phaleshu kadachana,
> ma karmaphalaheturbhurma te sango’stvakarmani
	
	You have a right to action, but only to action, never to its fruits; let not the fruits of your work be your motive, neither let there be in you any attachment to activity.
	
- It could be argued that this doctrine, or rather set of doctrines, is not moral so much as amoral. It is also an egocentric doctrine in as much as I have to be nishkama about the fruits of my action that may or may not accrue to me. It does not envisage a situation in which the fruits of my action may be visited upon other innocent bystanders. It releases the actor from worrying about the consequences of his actions.
- Obviously, elsewhere in the Mahabharata the doctrine of nishkama karma holds no water. Arjuna’s decision to fight on led to a horrendous slaughter of practically all who came to fight on either side, regardless of whether the Pandavas’ cause was just or not. The consolation Yudhishthira is offered by his brothers and Krishna when he is lamenting the tragedy of the war is that kshatrdharma has been observed and the dead died bravely. Hence Yudhishthira should not mourn his action. And yet the endgame in hell, which the Pandavas had to endure, demonstrates that the consequences of their action were not ignored but visited upon them.
- It is possible to argue that such indifference to other people around you, or just sheer selfishness of behaviour taught as being ideal, is at the root of many of India’s problems. People are happy to live smug in their riches, with squalor and starvation around them and yet believe that they are pious and perform their actions in a nishkama manner. Indeed, corruption itself may be pardoned by saying that one did not start out coveting such gains; one was unattached to the fruits of the action, illegal as they are. Instead of behaviour being ‘other-directed’ and mindful of their welfare, we have self-directed behaviour whose only aim is perfection of the self so as to obtain moksha.
- If my conscience then troubles me, I can invoke 9.30 as my escape clause:
	
> Api chetsuduracharo bhajate mamananyabhak
> Sadhureva sa mantavyah samyagvyavasito hi sah.



---
---
*Disclaimer: The content shared on this blog, including quotes and highlights from books, is intended for educational and informational purposes only. All rights to the original works are retained by the respective copyright holders. This blog does not claim ownership of any copyrighted material. If you are the copyright owner and believe that any content posted here infringes upon your rights, please contact us, and we will promptly remove the material in question.*

	If even a man of very evil conduct turns to Me with a sole and entire love, he must be regarded as a saint, for the settled will of endeavour in him is a right and complete will.

- I can take crores in bribe but if I visit temples and make a large donation, I can consider myself forgiven by God. No wonder, Indian temples are so wealthy with donations by the devout!
