#### A Part Apart by Ashok Gopal

- He was not a thinker in the traditional sense of the term in India. That is, he was not a person insulated from his immediate reality, contemplating matters like the ultimate truth. Nor was he, like many thinkers of our time, an academic. A lawyer by profession, he was a thinker in the thick of politics, playing the role of a leader and representative of the DCs. His thought arose from that position, as a response to the conditions he faced in the course of his life. This gave his ideas a vitality, depth, sweep and urgency that can be felt even today.

- From his marginal position, Ambedkar sought to secure rights for the DCs and change the course of mainstream Indian politics. He would have liked these efforts to be complementary, but due to the attitude of other political players towards the condition of the DCs, he was often forced to put DC interests first. As a result, he refused to join the freedom movement. In one of the first pieces he ever wrote after entering public life in 1919, he posed a question that defined his stand all the way till Independence and even after its attainment: 'Swarajya [self-rule ] for whom and from what?'

- Working with people who had been his political foes for over two decades, he helped build the constitutional edifice of what he called 'political democracy' in India.

- There is however a paradox here. Though Ambedkar was involved in politics for a large part of his life, the bulk of his writing aimed at the general public was on caste, religion and the need for social reform. We encounter yet another paradox. Though Ambedkar spoke of a movement, he was not inclined to embrace the demands it placed on him. Writing in a piece published in *Janata* on 10 December 1932, he said that there were few people in the world I who yearned for a 'quiet' and 'independent' life without burdens' more than him; he had embraced the 'noise and crowd' of public life as an unavoidable part of a 'duty that had been thrust upon him.
