#### Brahmin and Non-Brahmin: Genealogies of the Tamil Political Present by M. S. S. Pandian

#### 1. Introduction: The Politics of the Emergent
- The very term ‘non-Brahmin’, in its lexicalization, makes the Brahmin central. The normalization of the category non- Brahmin—i.e. the process of making it a transparent, naturalized, and sedimented category—simultaneously reconfigured the preexisting Brahmin identity. More specifically, this book maps the historical and political conjunctures that led to the formation of Brahmin and non-Brahmin as objects of discourse: the enunciative modalities which delimited the ways in which Brahmin and non-Brahmin were talked about, and how these figures acquired over time their concrete meanings.

	This choice is the consequence of two dominant, but problematic, approaches found in the existing literature on non-Brahmin politics in South India.
	- First, some of the key texts on non-Brahmin politics trivialize non-Brahmin identity as fictive despite its materialization and real consequences.
	- The second tendency in the existing literature is to treat the emergence of non-Brahmin identity as structurally inevitable. That is, its emergence holds no surprise at all. This is a tendency one also finds in popular histories of the non-Brahmin movement written by its ideologues.

- Colonialism is not merely a backdrop but a key player in the story of the making and normalization of Brahmin and non-Brahmin identities. Colonialism was many things at once—violent in the name of ‘civilizing’, economically extractive in the name of ‘modernizing’, and naïvely labelling in the name of gathering ‘knowledge’. These oxymoronic pairings point to ever-present contradictions in and the instability of the colonial project, but enframing the colonized into a set of categories and the constant reiteration of those categories did produce its own reality. The colonized mobilized and deployed these categories to work for varying ends. In other words, colonial categories acquired and changed their connotation through the uses to which they were put. Colonialism thus abetted and also provided the grounds for articulating and bringing into being new identities as much as it sought to freeze identities. National identity is perhaps the most obvious of these.
	Colonialism prepared the grounds for interpretive crises and possibilities. These twin aspects of colonialism facilitated the making and normalization of non-Brahmin identity in opposition to a resignified Brahmin identity.

---

#### 2. Becoming Brahmin in Colonial Tamil Nadu

- Missionary labour, in the terrain of identity-making encounters, was qualitatively different from the identity-framing practices of the state, practices such as colonial ethnography and census enumeration. The state’s activities were based on the notion of sovereignty, which the missionaries lacked. Importantly, colonial governmentality, as argued by David Scott, ‘put in place a public sphere in which only certain kinds of knowledges and not others . . . could circulate with any efficiency; a sphere in which fluency in these knowledges . . . would be a condition of participation; and in which participation would be the only rational and legal way of exercising influences in what now counts as politics.’

- Given their need to compare Hinduism with Christianity so that missionaries could at least try convincing natives, missionaries produced a flood of literature that tried to contain Hinduism’s fluidity and fix its meaning. By 1832, more than 40,000 tracts were printed in Tamil alone and by 1852 there were 2,10,000.

	As part of the missionary discourse which projected and thus externalized Hinduism as an object of debate in the colonial public sphere, caste too came to acquire its ‘objectness’. Treating caste as an impediment to both conversion and to the practice of Christian life, missionaries innovated various methods to ensure that both native clergy and their congregations were free from caste. Upper-caste converts, in an attempt to keep their identity separate from lower castes, claimed that caste was social and not religious. The lower castes, in contrast, tried to use the new opportunity to affirm new norms of equality.

- Often, missionary narratives about Brahmins exhibited a dual consciousness—envy for his philosophically-inclined religious and literary culture, and contempt for his ritually-driven pantheistic religious beliefs and practices because these were said to have reproduced caste as a system of power and subordination. The Brahmin had now to strive hard to affirm at once his religion as authentic (to consolidate European admiration for his religion as a way of firming up his power) and as modern (to stave off European criticism of his religious practices and the practice of caste, so to legitimize his power).

- One of the major organized responses to the Christian challenge took the form of a public meeting on 7 October 1846 in Madras, a meeting of the ‘Hindu community of Madras’ organized at Pachayappa’s Institution at Popham’s Broadway. Suntharalingam notes, ‘this was the first known Hindu gathering in Madras which had all the trappings of a modern political protest meeting: the permission of the Sheriff of Madras was secured; a chairman was elected to conduct the meeting; a number of resolutions were passed; and a memorial was approved and signed for submission to the government.’ Here, the basic features of a modern ideological movement were developed—printing press, newspaper, tracts, distribution network, meetings, membership lists, mufassal agent, and organised campaigns to influence “public” opinion.

	Similar efforts were again afoot in the 1880s. In 1881 the Hindu Preaching Society was founded and in 1887 Sivasankara Pandiah, a Gujarati Brahmin, founded the Hindu Tract Society. Hindu preachers countered Christian missionaries by ‘preaching, singing and distributing tracts against the Christian faith’ in the very places where missionaries preached. Western rationalist literature had a wide circulation among Hindu groups in the Tamil-speaking region, and Madras functioned as a sort of rationalist headquarters for the rest of British India.

- These acts of ‘replication’ and the speaking of a language similar to that used by Christian missionaries was the result of the conventions of the colonial public sphere as well as of Hindus imbibing the Christian notion that religion ought to be an institutionalized entity and a singular body rather than a disparate set of loosely linked practices. Imagining heterogeneous Hindu religious practices in terms of a single institutionalized religion led to different groups claiming that their beliefs and practices were the essence of the Hindu religion. The Brahminical and Saivite claims were the most important of these in the Tamil-speaking region during colonialism.

- Not only had the Brahmin to negotiate his loss of authority to the Englishman, who was no better than an outcaste, the larger fact was that the world had changed vastly with colonialism. This change, which encompassed a range of things—from the conduct of everyday rituals to what he ate and drank—put the Brahmin’s claim to Brahminhood under great stress. One of the many ways in which Tamil Brahmins responded to this crisis was to look for discursive and other means to ‘recover’ the so-called authentic but now lost Brahminical tradition.

-  Claiming the Brahminic as the national was an important move made by Tamil Brahmins. It was a move which implicitly reduced non-Brahmins and religious minorities as being inadequately Indian. The desire to recover the supposedly lost authenticity of the Brahmin was essentially a desire among English-educated Brahmins who were at once seduced by and constrained to work within the framework of colonial modernity for education, jobs, and social interaction. The twin roles—being authentic and being modern—which this Brahmin tried to balance in his everyday life was his inheritance from the contradictory demands of colonialism. It was a balancing act which both opened up as well as limited new possibilities for the Brahmin in this period. 

- This search for authenticity, or the desire to be ‘outside time’, was accompanied by a careful move by Brahmins to present extant Brahminical practices as always already modern. A number of publications in the first half of the twentieth century tried to present untouchability as a social practice based on modern rationality. There is no sign here at all of caste pollution as ritual prohibition. The upper castes casually get encoded as ‘pious and religious people’ or as ‘religious people of pure habits’ while the lower castes are encoded as ‘people living on rotten fish, flesh, garlic etc.’ Fish, flesh, and garlic are of course all taboo in the gastronomic and ritual universe of Brahmins. The deployment of such ‘casteless’ secularized language is so transparently a move to validate untouchability as scientific.

- Like ritual pollution, the caste system itself, in an even bolder move, was claimed by Brahmins to be scientific. In their hands it was often reinvented as a form of division of labour. The act of naturalizing caste as division of labour and of denying its specificity renders it similar to a Western institution— hence universal and modern. A space for religious reform, which could be represented to the colonizers as a process of becoming modern, is being salvaged in the name of re-establishing Brahmin authenticity.

- The debate among Tamil Brahmins on the questions of authenticity and religious reform produced a new space for claiming Brahminic Hinduism, based on Sanskrit texts, as authentically Hindu. This process was aided and abetted and energized primarily by two of the intellectual currents of the times, namely Orientalism and Theosophy.

	Friedrich Max Müller (1823–1900), who was repeatedly and almost reverentially invoked by Tamil Brahmins in their deliberations on Hinduism, is an important figure in this story. First, Müller took great pains to dispel the argument that Sanskrit is a dead language spoken by none and locked in esoteric texts. Establishing a close link between priestly Brahmins and the Vedic literature, and attributing their decline to the invading Turanians, Müller offers the Brahmins a claim over Vedic Hinduism as the original Indian religion. He also portrays the Turanians as their enemies. Turanians were understood in the pan-Indian context as lower castes and as the ‘original’ inhabitants of the southern part of India. The Theosophical Society played an important role in popularizing the ideas of Orientalists, including those of Müller, and were at the forefront of promoting Brahminical Hinduism as authentic Hinduism.

 - Inspired and supported by the Theosophical Society, a network of other organizations sprang into existence and began propagating Brahminical Hinduism as true Hinduism. Perhaps the most wellknown of them was the Hindu Tract Society founded in 1887 by Sivasankara Pandiah. In the course of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries this new Brahminical Hinduism was asserted as the essence of India by Tamil Brahmins, marginalizing various other forms of being Hindu.

 - Subranania Iyer (1855-1916) and five other Brahmins launched the first issue of The Hindu, a weekly newspaper  by him  and printed at the Srinidhi Press in Madras, appeared on 20 September 1878. His most important nationalist text, namely Arya Jana Ikiyam Allathu Congress Mahasabhai (Unity of the Aryan People or the Congress Party) was  published in 1888.
 
	 India’s geographical expanse and huge population were a matter of pride for Iyer.  The Aryans, who ‘never fear battles’, were aggressors against new regions and their inhabitants, their aggression was only ‘impelled by the love for their religion. Iyer did not find it necessary to name those who were the target of wars waged by his Aryans: in his scheme of things their culture, religion, and other lived aspects seem unworthy of mention. Here is elision and sweet slippage from conquest to the observance of dharma by conquerors, the invention of conquest as a morally-grounded project outside modern notions of sovereignty. 

	According to him, as the various streams of Aryans moved and settled in the different parts of India, they lost touch with each other. Their mutual isolation over long periods caused them to acquire the appearance of different communities. This story of the unity of Indians based on a commonly shared religion called Hinduism is simultaneously a claim to authenticity, and is therefore based on the logic of exclusion

	The Hinduism of the Indians elaborated by Iyer is undoubtedly the Hinduism of the Brahmins as redefined by Orientalist discourse. Vedas as truth, Sanskrit as deva basha, canonized religious texts such as the Ramayanam, Mahabharatam, Bhagavatam, Dharma Sastras and Smritis, as well as festivals like Sivarathiri, Devi Puja, and Gokulashtami have an emblematic presence in Brahminical Hinduism. As one moves down the caste hierarchy of the Hindus, all these texts and festivals disappear and what one has is a distinctly different domain of religiosities. Thus, what we have in Iyer is the reinscription of Brahminical Hinduism as the Hinduism and as the sign of Indianness, an identity between Indian nationalism and Brahminical Hinduism as envisioned by Iyer.

	Towards recovering the authentic national self in Brahminical Hinduism, Iyer also presented Islam as its Other. Though he was critical of Buddhism he was especially attentive to Islam, which he treated as a foreign religion, and represents a fairly standard Hindu nationalist critique of Islam in India, and simultaneously recovering Brahminical Hinduism as socially progressive. Both these claims are essential for Iyer’s anchoring of the nation in Brahminical Hinduism

---

#### 3. Brahmin Hybridity
　
- As long as the Brahmin’s dharma was not affected, he could comfortably embrace the material domain and its benefits brought in by colonialism. If we view the colonized and so-called ‘national culture’ as plural instead of singular, the success of dominant nationalism in carving out a domain of sovereignty over colonialism will at once emerge as the story of its domination over varied sections of subaltern social groups within the emerging nation. The competences and resources required to declare the nation sovereign in a particular domain of culture were obviously available only to dominant groups. The very domain of sovereignty that nationalism carves out in the face of colonial domination is simultaneously a domain of enforcing its own domination over subaltern social groups within the nation.

- Initial cultural endowments, disposition towards and access to literacy, access to information, and community and individual networks were some of the factors which decided the level of access that people had to the colonial material domain. This uneven access meant uneven distribution of power and resources among the colonized. The continuous exchange between these two domains under colonialism was, for instance, crystallized in the figure of the English-educated Brahmin. He claimed Brahminical culture as the essence of the nation and at the same time dominated the material domain because of his historically formed disposition towards literacy and access to English. Thus, what we see here is a hybridized form of power whereby the Brahmin metonymically equated his culture with that of the nation and simultaneously embraced the protocols of colonial modernity in order to access power and resources in the material domain.
- A feature of administrative recruitment in the Madras Presidency was the preponderance of the Brahmins . . . In 1886 the Brahmins held 42 per cent of all posts in the Madras Government carrying a monthly salary of over Rs 10. Brahmin domination was even more marked at the higher level of the Uncovenanted Service: of the 349 elite posts in the executive and judicial lines in 1886, no less than 202 (or 58 per cent) were in Brahmin hands. In certain special departments, Brahmin representation was just as preponderant. In the Registration Department, for example, 217 out of 365 officers were Brahmins.
	
	This trend continued through the early twentieth century. A comparison of the distribution of government jobs across different castes between 1896 and 1912 has shown that ‘the non-Brahmin Hindus had lost ground over the years 1896–1912 while the Brahmins had considerably increased their position.’

	English education brought rich dividends to Brahmins in terms of employment in the new institutional arenas opened up by colonialism, in particular within the practice of law. While only two non-Brahmin vakils held the office of the President of the Association between 1889 and 1920, two-thirds of the members elected during the first Bar Council election held on 22 September 1928 were Brahmins. The legal profession also brought enormous wealth and power to Tamil Brahmins.

- Brahmins themselves regarded such success as the natural outcome of their innate quality, of their higher intelligence. This rendered non-Brahmins, in the Brahmin eye, unfit for leadership and governance. An article by the lawyer G. Annaji Rao, entitled ‘The Passing of the Brahmana’, published in the New India in 1919, is instructive here. Two elements in Annaji Rao’s argument bear scrutiny. First, Brahmin leadership in politics emerges as almost predestined. As he puts it, the Brahmin was ‘in a sense expected to guide political agitation. Second, what makes the Brahmin fit to guide public affairs and politics is ‘his religion, training and tradition’, which belong to the inner spiritual domain. Thus, the domain of culture or spirituality becomes the justification for Brahmin leadership in the material domain of politics.
	
	Annaji also compares the nature of politics in South and North India as well as the so-called styles of politics of Brahmins and non-Brahmins: ‘If there was no “rebellion” and “waging war” in Madras, it was because Madras politics were literally governed by the peace-loving Brahmana. The disorders in Northern India were, on the other hand, due to the contempt the non-Brahmana had for the peaceful inaction advocated by the Brahmana and pro- Brahmana elements.

- Alongside this colonial material domain, in which Tamil Brahmins courted modernity and justified their existing hold over power in terms of their supposedly innate intelligence and culture, there existed the domain of culture, wherein Brahmins resisted modernity. Brahmin pandits were not only purveyors and protectors of the supposedly autonomous domain of culture, they were strongly influencing practices in the material domain—here the domain of colonial legality. This interlocking of the two domains of authority in the figure of the Brahmin was an anxiety slowly finding a hold among non-Brahmins of the Tamil region during the last decades of the nineteenth century.
- Certain Brahmins, holding the post of tahsildars, sub-magistrates, magistrates and deputy collectors, allow their minds to be warped by caste prejudices and religious bigotry even while discharging their public duties. Intimately linked to this dominant location of the Brahmin in the interlocked spiritual and material domains was his bilingualism in English and Sanskrit. 

	Emulation of the colonizer was a way up the social and professional ladder, and no one showed more still in emulating the British than the Tamil Brahmin. Most often the Brahmin’s knowledge of Sanskrit was only a claim. It was not so much actual knowledge of Sanskrit as their exclusive claim to it by Brahmins which is important for understanding the power produced by this bilingualism. In the emerging context of nationalism, Brahmin nationalists of different hues extolled Sanskrit as the carrier of national culture. 

	This zeal of the Brahmin for Sanskrit had to exist in a complicated relationship with Tamil. While the Brahmin’s use of Tamil was heavily sanskritized and was celebrated for its beauty despite its relative unintelligibility to most, the Tamil spoken by non-Brahmins was treated as unworthy of any man’s tongue. It must be noted here, all the same, that Brahmin contribution to the growth of Tamil literature and scholarship was substantial. But often, Brahmins who worked for the advancement of Tamil faced hostility from their own caste men.

- I need to underscore the point that the location of Sanskrit vis-à-vis Tamil in the preceding account was newly constituted under colonial conditions. While Sanskrit was a sign of Brahmin spirituality even in the pre-colonial period, its new location now exceeded the inner/spiritual domain. Sanskrit’s new life unfolded at the intersection between the inner and the outer, the public and the private, the spiritual and the material. The consequences of this particular kind of bilingualism are not far to seek. While English ensured the Brahmin’s access to authority in the material sphere of colonial institutions, Sanskrit, celebrated as deva bhasha (language of the gods), reinforced his authority in the spiritual/cultural sphere of indigenous society. In short, the bilingualism of the Brahmin in colonial Tamil Nadu was marked by the logic of exclusion. This exclusion affected the Brahmin as much as all others: to a significant level it even points to the isolation of the Brahmin from all others

	The scenario here is actually strikingly similar to that described by Antonio Gramsci regarding Italian intellectuals of the 1930s:
	> In Italy the term ‘national’ has an ideologically very restricted meaning, and does not in any case coincide with ‘popular’ because in Italy the intellectuals are distant from the people, i.e. from the ‘nation’. They are tied instead to a caste tradition that has never been broken by a strong popular or national political movement from below . . . The current term ‘national’ is connected in Italy to this intellectual and bookish tradition. Hence the foolish and ultimately dangerous facility of calling ‘anti-national’ whoever does not have this archaeological and moth-eaten conception of the country’s interest.


- As much as these organizations for associational life, the activities of the Indian National Congress were marked by Brahmin exclusiveness. Separate dining was in this a key marker of caste. For the Tamil Brahmin nationalist, travelling to and participating in All India Congress sessions organized outside his home town was quite an ordeal. What seems striking is the impossibility of distinguishing what is cultural and what material, what is private and what public, what is inner and what outer. The power of the Brahmin reproduced itself and proliferated inseparably in the two domains. This is perhaps why, as we saw earlier, the Dravidan, the Tamil newspaper of the Justice Party, compared the Indian National Congress to an agraharam.

	A reluctant Congress—prodded by its non- Brahmin members—was forced to acknowledge and address the issue of caste difference as part of its politics. Brahmin nationalists tried their best to keep the politics of difference outside the realm of the public, arguing the hypothetical unity of the nation, while non-Brahmins sought affirmation of heterogeneity and difference. It highlighted the self-imposed isolation of Brahmin leadership and its inability to forge a national-popular historic bloc. 
- Eventually, a non-Brahmin enclave within the overarching framework of Congress—the Madras Presidency Association (MPA)— was formed ‘at a meeting of the non-Brahmana bankers, merchants, landholders, sowcars [moneylenders], traders and representatives of the various professions of the city and mufassal. The MPA was thus at once for the unity of the nation and the articulation of non-Brahmin interest within the framework of Congress nationalism. It did not want to break ranks with nationalism. In other words, this was a moment when the claim of mainstream nationalism to represent the nation—including non-Brahmins— looked triumphant. However, the triumph was short-lived. In a hierarchy of interests, the interests of non-Brahmins were subordinated to those of the nation by the MPA. Nationalism’s discourse, valorizing sacrifice, yet again proved seductive


- In 1918 the Government of India constituted a committee under Lord Southborough to examine the question of electorates, constituencies, and franchise. The two Indian members on the committee, V.S. Srinivasa Sastry and S.N. Banerjee, were both Brahmins. This was followed by a Joint Parliamentary Committee appointed in London in 1919 for constitutional reform. The meetings of the Joint Parliamentary Committee at London were followed by two conferences between Brahmin and non-Brahmin representatives in Madras. The Governor of Madras, Lord Wellington, who presided over the conference, offered 50 per cent of the seats in the local legislatures to non- Brahmins, who constituted over 90 per cent of Madras Presidency’s population. Lord Meston was appointed as the final arbitrator in this dispute. He granted non-Brahmins twenty-four seats, which was much less than the number promised by Lord Wellington. What came as a surprise to the leadership of the MPA was the lack of any opposition to the Meston award among most Tamil Brahmin nationalists.

	Disappointed, and now sharing a platform with the Justice Party, The MPA resolved that non-Brahmins of the Madras Presidency should work for the success of non-Brahmin candidates so as to secure all seats in the council.

- Brahmin nationalists had to disallow differences based on caste in order to emerge victorious in the public domain. Denial of caste difference was the only way by which the putative identity between Brahminical and national could be represented as natural, and the challenge to it silenced. Affirming the ‘naturalness’ of this identity was a necessary condition for the Brahmin to preserve the new forms of power produced by the imbrication of the spiritual and material domains over this period of colonial rule.

---

####  4. Speaking the Other/Making the Self: The New Voice of the Non-Brahmin

##### PUNDIT IYOTHEE THOSS (1845-1914):　
- As we have seen earlier, in Iyer’s account the conquered remained unnamed and were consigned to silence. Iyer’s is in fact a story of Aryans without the conquered others ever figuring in it! In sharp contrast, Thoss put all his emphasis on the story of the conquered, namely the ‘Dravidian Buddhists’. Thoss’s notion of an authentic Brahmin (‘Yathartha Brahmin’) who is already marked as the Buddhist Parayar, is where we may begin our exploration of his notion of Brahminhood. Thoss’s list of moral practices which constitute the authentic Brahmin is long. He distinguishes this Brahmin, whose Brahminhood rests on moral conduct, from those who claim it by birth. The latter he calls Vesha Brahmins, i.e. Brahmin pretenders.
- In his two discursive moves—making caste inhere in moral conduct and attaching it to occupations—he chose the former as his main vehicle for his critique of the caste system. This may have been because the occupational mobility of the Untouchable, when compared to others, was relatively slow even in the colonial situation; Untouchables were largely trapped in culturally demeaning and textually prescribed occupations. By placing emphasis on moral conduct as the foundation of Brahminhood, Thoss effectively launched a powerful critique of Brahmins and Brahminism in his time. Simultaneously, he discursively produced Parayars as the authentic Brahmins of the past. He refers to them as ‘Buddha Brahmins’;
- However, Thoss’s emphasis on individual conduct simultaneously confined his politics to the limited realm of religio-cultural practices. Iyothee Thoss’s proposed measures avoid confronting the question of uneven power between castes. The relational, which was so central to Thoss’s thought, thus disappears in the Buddhist practices he promoted. Thoss had therefore appropriated Brahminical ritual by claiming it as originally Buddhist, a reclamatory act which contested the Brahmin’s exclusive claim to it. However, such appropriation also served to idealize existing Brahminical practices and inferiorized Parayar practices such as fire-walking and animal sacrifice. Thoss’s strategy was thus primarily one of attunement—‘a strategy by which members of a community become more closely oriented to a higher direction in being and to the more harmonious life it renders possible.’
- A substantial part of Thoss’s intellectual labour failed to reach the realm of the popular because of his usage of centamil. The consequence of functioning outside the realm of the popular was that it constrained and limited the emergence of a Parayar political public. During the 1920s and the 1930s, from among the followers of Thoss, two distinct platforms were beginning to be set up for discussions of religio-cultural questions on the one hand and sociopolitical issues on the other. The 'secular’ mobilization of the Parayars contested the power of the Brahmin in the domain of the political instead of in that of the religio-cultural. The mobilized mass [under Thoss’s Buddhism] became the foot-soldiers of the Dravidian movement under the leadership of E.V. Ramasamy.

##### MARAIMALAI ADIGAL (1876–1950):
- A Saivite intellectual whose critique of the Brahmin during the first half of the twentieth century resembled in many ways the ideas of Iyothee Thoss, though the people he addressed were primarily upper-caste Saivites. In his *Mullaipattu Araichiurai* (1903), he linked this accomplishment of Tamil to the prevalence of Buddhism in the Tamil region. He also asserted that the Buddhists were essentially Tamils, in contrast to the normal Saivite hostility to Buddhism during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Like Thoss, Adigal claimed that the contemporary Brahminism was a selective appropriation of ancient Tamil practices. Launching the Tanitamil Iyakkam (Tamil Purist Movement) in 1916, he combated Sanskritic accretions in the Tamil language, replacing them with ‘pure’ Tamil words, and thus attempted to assert the autonomy of Tamil from Sanskrit.

- Adigal opposed caste without giving up the Saivite Vellalar as his ideal. Adigal’s intellectual labour spawned a stylized and meticulously argued version of Dravidianism/non-Brahminism by othering the Brahmin. The sovereignty of reason being central to this agenda, he was weary with anything that came in the way of its free reign. His unambiguous rejection of the claim that the Puranas were authored by divine beings is a telling case in point.

	He argued that the philosophy of Saivism met this requirement of validation by science. We have earlier seen that Brahminical practices were validated as modern via making claims to science. In other words, both the defence of Brahminic practices as well as their critique, as developed by Adigal, had to participate in the new grids of intelligibility authorized by colonialism.

	Adigal’s historicist framework, following the modernist grid, moved in a linear fashion from the state of barbarism to civilization. He typologized distinct occupations as markers of progress or its lack. Significant within Adigal’s construction of history is his claim that settled agriculture pursued by the Vellalars not only unfettered them from material hardship but also cultivated their minds and gave rise to a world of superior moral values. Saiva Siddhanta (Philosophy of Saivism), which to him was the highest achievement of the Tamil mind, had as one of its central tenets non-killing (read vegetarianism), and hence its claim to compassion and munificence. Thus, Adigal’s sequencing of Tamil history developed an identity between the Vellalars, their traditional occupation of settled cultivation, and Saivism as the civilizational apotheosis of history.

- Adigal’s project was not one of recovering or reiterating the husbandman as an ideal, however, but of using this ideal to develop a critique of non-Vellalars—both Brahmins and others. Adigal proceeded—now through a set of comparative studies of castes—to assess the civilizational location of non-Vellalars within his teleological history. His conclusion was foregone—non-Vellalars were way behind the superior civilizational moment of the Vellalars. What remains speculation in Caldwell becomes fact in Adigal. If the Aryan Brahmins triumphed in establishing their authority over Vellalar-centric Tamil society—both by imitating the Vellalars (in rituals that did not involve killing) and by introducing the caste system—it was all done in a society whose original internal divisions were based on a differentiation of occupations. Adigal argued that caste was the corruption of a pre-existing form of division of labour and an invention of Brahmins to dominate Tamils. In other words, while the Brahmin invoked the division of labour to legitimize caste, Adigal invoked it to discredit caste. Caste groups no longer needed rebirth to liberate themselves from their present imputed status as Sudras because in Adigal’s scheme they were in fact not Sudras. Significantly, Adigal also relocated them outside the caste system by claiming occupation as the basis for social differentiation in ancient Tamil society

- As in the case of the early Aryan Brahmins, Adigal argued, proof of an uncivilized status among non-Vellalar non-Brahmin castes was their lack of love and compassion—as evident from their dietary practice (meat-eating) and the religious practice of animal sacrifices to minor deities.The Saivite Vellalar was, in Adigal’s reckoning, the epitome of compassion. Adigal resolved the problem of power between Vellalars and the others by means of a romanticized Vellalar moral economy: ‘with the lowly submitting themselves to their superiors [the Vellalars], and the superiors protecting the lowly, the ancient Tamils led a beautiful life of peace and order. Adigal’s claim has two connotations. First, history as a process fulfilled itself in the present of Vellalar being, and its remaining task was to convert others in their image. Second, the lower occupational/caste groups could not liberate themselves on their own terms, but only by casting themselves in the mould of the Vellalar

- As with Thoss, Adigal’s cultural project was thus one of ‘attunement’. And projects of attunement, in enforcing a ground for consensus (either through enunciation or violence), cannot escape networks of power. While he attacked the caste system in his writings and public lectures, he apparently saw no contradiction in calling for the preservation of rigid Brahminical/ Saivite caste scruples, such as strictures against commensality. In brief, therefore, Adigal’s particular ordering of history, freezing it in the valorized present of the Saivite Vellalar and deploying it through comparative studies of caste groups, discursively dethroned the Brahmin and replaced him with the Saivite Vellalar. Simultaneously, and ironically, this reordering of history denied any enabling possibility to non-Brahmin castes below Vellalars. The most that Adigal offered to these lower castes was a somewhat dubious sort of Vellalar paternalism.

- As a result of its logic of exclusion, Adigal’s project failed to engage a wider non-Brahmin public. Though known for his lecturing and debating skills, his audience remained a small circle of the Saivite elite. The list of demands that he placed on those who invited him to lecture: substantial monetary compensation, cooking utensils to spices and comfortable furniture. We also know that Adigal ‘never addressed open-air meetings. His discourses were conducted in decorated pandals, well-ventilated and properly lighted.’ These stringent and expensive conditions reveal how Adigal himself envisioned his audience. Except for the anti-Hindi agitation of 1938, Adigal’s involvement in formal politics was non-existent; in fact he dissuaded his sons from taking part in active politics.

The so-called pure Tamil which he employed in his writings and public lectures, was ornate, pedantic, and at a considerable distance from the spoken Tamil of common people. The parallel here between Adigal’s Tamil and that deployed by Thoss hardly needs emphasis. In fact Adigal himself confessed that his decades of intellectual labour had not produced much impact.

- Regarding Adigal’s encounter with the Self-Respect Movement: to begin with, the Self-Respecters criticized Vaishnavite texts like the Ramayana. But when this critique expanded within the Movement to include revered Saivite texts, such as Periyapuranam, Saivite opposition to Self-Respect gained momentum. The critique of Saivism by Self-Respecters was explicitly meant to free subordinate social groups from the hold of religion—so that they might assert their sovereign human agency—as well as to unravel the ways in which Saivism was implicated in perpetuating the caste system. Adigal, despite his celebration of reason and opposition to caste (as he understood it), never came to terms with this wider agenda. Immersed in his Saivite sectarianism, he viewed all else as a mere conspiracy of Vaishnavites.

	The failure of Adigal’s campaign is evident in the fact that, within months, unable to counter virulent counterattacks by Self-Respecters, he decided to compromise with E.V. Ramasamy, the founder-leader of the Self-Respect Movement

-  Brahmins, as we have seen, were at this time anxious to be at once authentic and modern. This very anxiety and the discourses Brahmins produced were resignified by Thoss and Adigal as a moment of their moral failure because of their iniquitous practice of caste. Negating Brahminism, they respectively valorized the Buddhist Parayar and the Saivite Vellalar. Regrettably, this substitution only recast their ideal in more or less the image of the Brahmin. 

	In other words, the Brahminic ideal remained substantially intact even if the supposedly moral qualities of the ideal Brahmin had been freed from the Brahmin’s body and relocated in the idealized Buddhist Parayar and the Saivite Vellalar. The anti-Brahminism of Iyothee Thoss and Maraimalai Adigal was no different, for the metaphysics of caste as an enforced hierarchy remained in their discourses, largely intact

---

#### 5. From Culture to Politics: The Justice Party

- The anti-Brahmin discourses of Thoss and Adigal functioned primarily in the register of culture, countering the Brahmin’s claim to moral and spiritual superiority. But their critique, being limited to the spiritual/moral/ cultural, failed to engage substantially with the material consequences of Brahmin power, i.e. how it resulted in an uneven distribution of economic and political resources across castes.

- The first institutionalized step to address the material consequences of colonial education for various non-Brahmin castes took the form of the Madras Dravidian Association. This association was founded in 1912 by C. Nadesa Mudaliar. It established a number of branches in the city, and organized public talks by non-Brahmin intellectuals and founded a hostel named Dravidian Home for non-Brahmin students. Calling the hostel ‘Dravidian’ points to the assimilation of the ideas of the Madras School of Orientalism in the public discourses of the Tamil region. Simultaneously it also, by contrast, endorsed the Brahmin’s description of himself as Aryan. If Aryan could substitute for Brahmin, Dravidian would serve for non-Brahmin

	In other words, it did not look at caste in relational terms and thus did not confront the question of power. Non-Brahmins were treated as if they were a self-enclosed community.

- Things changed with the call for self-government or Indian home rule (within the British empire). The Home Rule Movement spoke a language of self-government that refused to recognize caste and other differences within the nationin- the-making, presenting a homogenized Indian unmarked by other identities as key players within self-government. Nationalism was now seeking a nation and not presenting specific grievances to the British. Seeking a nation entailed presenting a nation in the singular.

	Opposing the Home Rulers, a number of prominent non-Brahmin men decided to ‘start a company for publishing a newspaper advocating the cause of the non-Brahmin community and also . . . a political association . . . to advance, safeguard and protect the interests of the same community.’ A joint stock company named the South Indian People’s Association was floated to bring out newspapers. The other part of the initiative, i.e. forming a political association, acquired the shape of the South Indian Liberal Federation (or the Justice Party. The Justice Party concentrated its efforts towards gaining reservations for non-Brahmins in the Madras legislature as well as in government jobs. 

- The Justice Party was in power in the Madras Presidency from 1921 to 1926 and, after a break, it was once again returned to power in 1930. It institutionalized reservation of government jobs for different categories of non- Brahmins. The party also ensured the passing of the Hindu Religious Endowment Act, under which committees of elected and partially nominated members from a variety of castes exercised control over temples.

	The party exhibited contrary ideological tendencies, leading to bitter discord within. These differences basically revolved around the question of social reform. T.M. Nair, O. Kandaswami Chetti, T.A. Ramalinga Chetti, J.S. Kannappar, C. Natesa Mudaliar, and J.N. Ramanathan advocated social reform. But others such as Theagaraya Chetti, opposed such reform. Conservatives within the party neither endorsed the Hindu Religious Endowment Act nor the inclusion of Untouchables in temple committees.

- The brief history of the Justice Party tells us that it conducted its politics in the formal domain of politics constituted by colonial modernity. Its manifesto, newspapers, representations to committees, elections, ministries, and law-making were all signs of this. In keeping with the authorized conventions of this domain, the party also spoke a language sharply different from that of Iyothee Thoss and Maraimalai Adigal. The present, instead of the past, dominated its politics. The place of religion, culture, and interpretations of literary texts was overtaken by the issue of jobs, education, elections, and statistics

- British colonialism, in keeping with governmental practices in the home country, produced incredible amounts of numerical data on varied aspects of the population in British India. These statistical enquiries were not viewed by Indians as tools of impartiality and transparency, but rather as informed by the coercive intentions of colonial rule. 

	However, local attitudes towards numbers changed with time. The immediate reason for this was the move by the British to implement limited constitutional changes whereby Indians would be given representation in the legislatures, based on restricted franchise. Various communities sought a place in the new constitutional scheme and pressed their claims on the basis of statistical data. The Manifesto issued by the Justice Party functioned within such statistical imagination and presented its case by means of numbers. They made it mandatory for bureaucrats to produce periodic statistics about appointments so as to enable assessment of the advancement made by different communities. The very same statistics became in the hands of the Justice Party an instrument to seek higher representation for non-Brahmins in government services. 

- Colonialism also institutionalized a new framework within which politics, in the public domain, had to be conducted. Idioms of ‘constitutional liberalism’ such as forming organizations to articulate interests, and politics based on representation, were key elements of this new framework. Given the demands of this framework of politics, the Manifesto insisted on the need to create a network of organizations to represent non-Brahmin interests. If the discourses of Thoss and Adigal were primarily pedagogic, those of the Justice Party were representational.

- While self-recrimination and an emphasis on self-help—which were similar to the agenda of earlier non-Brahmin associations such as the Madras Dravidian Association—were an important strand within the discourse of the Justice Party, it was also aware that such political autarky could not address or alter the existing condition of non-Brahmins. In its understanding, their condition was a result of a historically evolved relationship between Brahmins and non- Brahmins.

	The Justice Party questioned the Brahmin claim that their intelligence was natural. While the Manifesto spoke of their tradition of literacy and freedom from manual labour as, among other things, the historical conditions which accounted for the privileged location of the Brahmin in the Madras Presidency, the propaganda of the party concentrated on the political economy of productive labour by non-Brahmins and the surplus thus generated in sustaining Brahmin ascendancy. We see here again an invocation of the division of labour. This invocation contrasts with the conceptions of Thoss and Adigal, for division of labour was an exalted ‘pre-Aryan’ mode of organizing Tamil society—an idea that was clearly a result of their notion of a non-Brahminic golden age. For the Justice Party, such division of labour was a mechanism sustaining Brahmin power by draining away non-Brahmin wealth. 

	By redescribing the spiritual authority of Brahmins as a means by which non-Brahmin wealth was appropriated by Brahmins for nonproductive purposes, the Justice Party caused the delicate boundary between the spiritual and material to become unstable and permeable. Their emphasis was, once again, on the worldly: the party conceptualized the otherworldly as folded into the worldly and not as autonomous. If Brahmins justified caste by establishing its kinship with division of labour, the Justice Party represented them as unproductive and hence insignificant in the very same division of labour. Given the Justice Party’s emphasis on the pursuit of production, it discounted mainstream education which produced a body of service classes such as clerks and lawyers, instead seeking industrial education.

-  It is important to remember here that the essence of the nation was not always located in the domain of culture. As Satish Deshpande has shown—by drawing instances from the Swadeshi Movement— there were moments in the career of Indian nationalism when the nation was perceived as a community of producers. This fact has to be understood as a move by elite nationalists to forge an anti-colonial historic bloc by deflecting attention away from cultural differences within the ‘national’ community. 

- It might seem an anomaly that the Justice Party, despite its productivist imagination and interventions, still vigorously sought government employment for non-Brahmins. The anomaly was surely an outcome of colonial policies. Ramaswami Mudaliar referred to when he reasoned: ‘It is not a question of a few posts here and there . . . It is for the position of power that even small appointments carry that we fight for. 

- Brahmin nationalists and a section of the British bureaucracy. They criticized the Justice Party as ‘communalist’ and vigorously opposed caste-based quotas in government appointments and legislatures. In other words, this was a strategy of keeping out the play of differences from the public realm.

- It is quite true that the leadership of the Justice Party, like most of the leadership of the Indian National Congress, was drawn from the English-educated class, but a section of the leadership of the Justice Party consciously worked among subaltern Tamils, propagating the party’s ideology. The party also built up a network of local associations— even reaching small towns and some villages. These were known as Dravidian Associations. The party distributed propaganda literature as well.

	Though the leadership of the Justice Party may have tried to confine its politics within the protocols of elite colonial public domain, it often could not. The party produced an atmosphere of dissent which resulted in ‘rabble-rousing’ forms of political intervention that exceeded the limits set for politics by the party leadership. In short, the ideas propagated by the party circulated in a larger public within which elite and subaltern domains intersected.

---

#### 6. The Brahmin as a Trope: The Self-Respect Movement
- The Orientalist construction, which offered the basis of speaking about Hinduism in the singular, also opened up the possibility of speaking about the Brahmin as if one were thereby speaking of Hinduism, and vice versa. In other words, Hinduism and the Brahmin became nearly synonymous in the new discursive practices, and this conferred vast powers on the Brahmin. A critique of Hinduism could simultaneously be, and be understood as, a critique of the Brahmin and the Indian nation.

	This was a critique which did not confine itself to caste but included the overarching question of power. Also, the centralization of the Brahmin in this critique acquired a new complexity. The Brahmin and the Brahminical could now be invoked to explain and contest various forms of power.

##### E . V. RAMASAMY (1879–1973

- Ramasamy's entry into the larger arena of nationalist politics began in 1917 when he joined the Madras Presidency Association or MPA, which we saw earlier as the non-Brahmin enclave within the Indian National Congress. He formally joined the Congress in 1920 and served as its president in 1920 and 1924, and as its secretary in 1921 and 1922. As an activist in Gandhi’s Non-Cooperation Movement, he spent considerable time, energy and money for such nationalist causes. Though he participated in various activities of Congress, his main focus as a nationalist was on the issue of caste-based inequalities

	He finally broke ranks with Congress in November 1925 when two of his resolutions favouring ‘communal representation’ for non- Brahmins were disallowed in the Kancheepuram conference of the Tamil Nadu Congress. Thereafter he declared his political credo to be ‘no god, no religion, no Gandhi, no Congress, and no Brahmins’.

- Ramasamy revaluated his stance on the British Raj and found several things in it worthy of critical appropriation. However, Ramasamy’s approval of the Raj was naturally not unqualified. He offered two sets of reasons for such differential politics practised by the British.
	- The first set of reasons which disabled the British Raj from going all the way in affirming Manitha Dharma in the colony could be located in the resistance offered by Brahmin nationalists. He cited instances of sustained Brahmin opposition to social reform initiatives such as the Devadasi Abolition Act, the Child Marriage Restraint Act, and the Hindu Religious Endowment Act.
	- The second set of reasons he gave implicated both British and Brahmins. He argued that British reluctance over Manitha Dharma was a result of their need for local collaborators ‘to carry on their rule in this country [India] forever and to generously plunder and transfer the wealth of this country to theirs. Identifying these collaborators as Brahmins, he implicated both colonialism and Brahmins as upholders of Manu Dharma

- In 1931–2, Ramasamy, along with S. Ramanathan, toured Europe. On his return to India in 1932 he and Singaravelu Chettiyar floated the Samadharma (Socialist) Party of India. But faced with constant state repression, Ramasamy soon gave up his open avowal of socialism. In 1938, he was elected president of the Justice Party. In 1944 he renamed the party ‘Dravidar Kazhagam’, which became his vehicle for socio-religious criticism until his death in 1973.

- The singularity of Hinduism, as it figured in the discourse of Ramasamy, had at least two sources. The first was the ideology of rationalism. The second was the Orientalist idea of Hinduism foregrounded by the Brahmins themselves. Setting up rationality and religion as oppositional, he also claimed that self-willed reason alone could restore the real worth of those enslaved by religion. For Ramasamy, self-respect and rationality were necessary allies. Basing himself on rationalism, Ramasamy engaged with Hinduism as a unified field of false beliefs.

- The Self-Respect Movement wanted its followers to employ self-willed rationality as a means to gain control over their lives. Alongside, Ramasamy foregrounded a specific form of Hinduism as essential Hinduism.

	For Ramasamy the evolution of Hinduism began with the Vedic religion and transformed over time as the Aryan religion, the Brahmin religion, and finally as the Hindu religion. More than his rational dismissal of religion, his critique of this essential Hinduism is of key importance in understanding how he reconceptualized the figure of the Brahmin.

- Three Hindu religious texts were consciously chosen by his movement in advancing the idea of an essential Hinduism—the Manusmriti, the Ramayana, and the Bhagavad Gita. Importantly, all three texts attempted to transcend sectarian affiliations among Hindus and present a unified Hinduism. Vocal criticism against the Manusmriti as legislating the degradation of non-Brahmin castes through Varnashrama Dharma, the backbone of casteism, was a daily refrain of the Self-Respect Movement. Ramasamy treated the Gita as a text endorsing Varnashrama Dharma. Ramasamy lavished much critical attention also on the Ramayana. The Ramayana was reread and reinterpreted by Ramasamy also as a text celebrating North Indian Brahminic imperialism. In the eyes of Ramasamy and his movement the Tamil Brahmin’s claim that his original home was in the North, and that Brahmins are Aryans, was turned against them.

	By critiquing the Manusmriti, the Bhagavad Gita, and the Ramayana, Ramasamy showed up caste—and hence the Brahmin—as central to this ‘essential’ Hinduism. The very flexibility of Hinduism was read by him as a Brahminic strategy of co-opting opposition to caste and thereby reaffirming Brahminic supremacy. It is this conception of Hinduism as essentially Brahminic which drew the attention of the movement to Sanskrit. The Self-Respect Movement thus inverted the Brahmin/nationalist construction of Sanskrit as a sign of refinement, redescribing it as a vehicle for Brahminic power.

- The Self-Respect Movement thus mobilized various sections of non-Brahmins against Brahmin hegemony by fusing these critiques, the rationalist and the ‘transitive’. These two modes were brought together by representing Brahminic Hinduism as the source of the inferiorized identity of non-Brahmins, and by claiming that the remedy lay in a rational critique of religion.

	Ramasamy’s project was to create a historic bloc of different interests that opposed the Brahmin. The putative conceit of Brahminic texts and practices in producing women’s subordination, and their own contrasting use of rationality as emancipatory, was a recurrent theme in the movement’s propaganda. 

	Ramasamy also made an explicit connection between Brahminic Hinduism and the inferiorization of physical labour. Turning to the opposition between physical labour and mental labour, he again showed that Varnashrama Dharma was its institutional foundation.

- He often spoke of the nation and Hinduism simultaneously, evoking their network and parallelism. This was an iconoclasm that saw no difference between Brahminic Hinduism and the Indian nation. The actual caste of these different power-holders—the Brahmins, the upper castes, the rich, the religious, the connoisseurs of art—did not matter to the Self-Respect Movement. The very act of exercising power rendered them Brahminic. By constituting the essence of power as Brahminic, the movement tried to bring together a vector of varied interests based on inferiorized identities— against the Brahmin, and against all that was Brahminic.

- The movement’s propaganda methods were unconventional and directed at forming a subaltern non- Brahmin public. This public was qualitatively different from those produced by other critics of the Brahmin who preceded the Self- Respect Movement—such as Thoss and his neo-Buddhism, Adigal and his Saivism, and even the non-Brahmin subalternity of the Justice Party. The hegemonic domain of the everyday—such as temples, festivals, traditions, and modes of schooling—had perforce to be the site of its ideological intervention.

	In keeping with such an understanding, the movement chose to step aside from the formal domain of politics. In fact its emphasis on the everyday brought the movement into conflict with the Justice Party, which played its politics in the authorized colonial public sphere. Ramasamy reserved some of his most scathing criticism for Tamil pundits who constructed and propagated a glorious version of the Tamil past through a reading of classical Tamil literature full of religiosity.

- Given the importance assigned to public address, the Self-Respect Movement made special efforts to initiate its women leaders and young cadres into public speech. The movement stood against middle-class respectability in its mode of political address. At a time when nationalists abhorred the participation of prostitutes and devadasis in politics, the very first Self-Respect conference held in Chengalpattu in 1929 chose to issue a special invitation to them.  By breaking away from the golden ageism of Thoss and Adigal and the formal politics of the Justice Party, Self-Respecters produced a new public and a fresh strand of common sense about Brahmins.

- The introduction of Hindi in schools, and the use of the honorific ‘Sri’ before names in official correspondence. Both these changes were introduced by the Congress government led by C. Rajagopalachari during the 1930s.  Rajagopalachari’s Brahminic stance in favour of Sanskrit remained intact all through his life, even after he shed his passion for Hindi in the post-1947 period. In his later life, when he claimed that Hindi ‘is stranger than English is in the non-Hindi area of India’, he also argued: ‘Sanskrit is the only language to which all India could pay unqualified homage . . . It kept India together in spite of every foreign invasion, foreign armies, foreign religions and foreign cultures . . . the study of Sanskrit literature may be encouraged greatly in order to guard our culture, our tradition and our soul

	The language ideology advocated by Ramasamy basically claimed that language is constitutive of social relations through ideas inscribed in vocabulary: ‘The greatness of a language depends on the ideas it conveys. It is possible to understand a particular people’s civilization and knowledge only through the spoken language of those people. To accept or to reject a particular language depends on the progressive ideas contained in that language.’ He assessed languages on the basis of whether they promoted equality among different social groups and whether they were amenable to rational thought. Sanskrit, English, and Tamil were assessed by the movement, within such a framework of reasoning.

- If the Self-Respect Movement’s critique of Sanskrit divested the claim of that language to cultural superiority and recast it as a vehicle for forms of disempowerment, it read English as a language of modernity rather than as one of colonial governance.

	In other words, while English functioned as a form of cultural capital and an instrument to access bureaucratic authority for the Brahmin elite, it had a different connotation in the discourse of the Self-Respect Movement. For the movement, it was the carrier of enabling ideas which could be mobilized to interrogate existing arrangements of power in Tamil society, and to recover a space for subaltern assertion against the transitive identities of the Brahmin. This reading of English was made possible by, among other things, the Self-Respect Movement’s ambivalent engagement with colonialism, its disillusionment with Indian nationalism, and its encompassing rationalism unconfined by all singular notions of nation-space

- Regarding the manner in which the Self-Respect Movement engaged with Tamil: significantly, the movement did not view the opposition between Sanskrit and Tamil as pure and absolute. Though Tamil embodied ideas of more equal social relations as compared to Sanskrit, it required refashioning so as to negotiate the multiple forms of disempowerment faced by the Tamil subaltern classes. Towards this agenda the movement developed a critique of the Tamil language as embodying and legitimizing irrationality and inequality of different kinds. The cultural practices which drew its greatest attention related to religion and gender.

- The agitation launched by the Self-Respect Movement against Hindi continued from 1937 to 1940 and finally succeeded in evicting it from the Tamil school curriculum. The largest number of participants in the agitation were drawn from various subaltern strata of Tamil speakers. What needs to be kept in mind here is that, unlike Congress, the Self-Respect Movement’s politics never carried the middle-class stamp of respectability; and that even so, women found it worthwhile to support the anti-Hindi agitation.

	A third important social group which found the anti-Hindi agitation a site for articulating their political anxieties was the Muslims. In communalizing the language issue, the Hindi movement in North India had, on the one hand, associated Urdu with Islam. It presented, on the other, Hindi as Indian and Hindu. We need to remember here that the Self-Respect Movement, despite its criticisms of Islam, treated it as a religion promoting equality.

- Now to the second event—the decision by the Congress ministry in 1939 to introduce ‘Sri’ as a general honorific title in place of ‘Maharaja Rajasri’ (M.R.Ry.) for Hindus, ‘Janab’ for Muslims, and ‘Mr’ for Christians. A notification seeking objections was published in The Hindu on 23 March 1938. As there was no immediate opposition to the new honorific, the Congress government introduced the change.

	In May 1938 Viduthalai, edited by Ramasamy, took up the issue. In a strongly worded editorial, it condemned the change. Four years later, in February 1942, Ramasamy, as President of the Justice Party, submitted to the governor of Madras a resolution passed by the executive committee of the party. Following Ramasamy’s representation the governor of Madras once again sought public opinion on the question of the honorific. This time there was an avalanche of responses. There were over 400 representations favouring the Tamil honorific ‘Thiru’ signed by several thousand people. Though a large number of representations were orchestrated by Justice Party units that were spread throughout the Tamil-speaking area, the most striking aspect of the responses was the diversity of sources.

- Both the anti-Hindi agitation and the controversy over the official honorific show that Self-Respecters were able to mobilize an array of identities as part of their politics. Often, the identities thus mobilized did not overtly have anything to do with the issues at hand. Neither Hindi nor the official honorific would have mattered in the ‘normal understanding’ to women, lower castes, and Adi Dravidas, who were an important part of the story.

---
