
- Perhaps one of the main reasons why Maoism as an idea spread widely across much of the global South in comparison to other forms of leftist social movements was Mao’s theorisation of the role of the peasantry in revolutionary change. Earlier forms of Marxism saw the proletariat—of which the classic image was the dehumanised urban factory worker—as the truly revolutionary class that would usher in a classless society. They regarded the peasantry as reactionary and a force that would disappear from history because they would be uprooted from their land and would eventually join the urban proletariat. Mao turned this received wisdom on its head and argued for revolutionary history to be made by peasants who would lead a war from the countryside. In a context in which mass industrialisation and the formation of a proletariat was absent from the history of many nations, Maoism therefore enabled a vast swathe of the global South to be the potential harbinger of revolutionary social change.

- In addition to this focus on the peasantry, Maoism as an idea was also popular for at least two other reasons.
	- First, Mao saw capitalism as inextricably tied to foreign imperialism and therefore argued that revolutionary change had to be thought of as a worldwide struggle of the forces of socialism against those of imperialism. Mao thus became immediately relevant for many who were fighting colonialism and who either headed anti-colonial movements against the imperial nations or were developing critiques against their own national elites who they argued had allied with colonial forces.
	- Second, Maoism allowed for the translation of a wide range of local conditions and problems through the political, organisational and leadership method which Mao called the ‘mass line’, central to which was consulting with the masses and interpreting and incorporating their suggestions within the revolutionary framework. ‘From the masses to the masses’—as the mass line was referred to—was based on investigating the conditions of people, learning about and participating in their struggles, gathering ideas from them, and creating a plan of action based on their concerns in light of the revolutionary goal. The implication was that Maoism could flourish in discrete ways in different parts of the world, based on local conditions, and with little to do with Maoism elsewhere, or, for that matter, as it existed in China.    
	Everywhere the high theory of the Indian Maoist analysis of the economy translated on the ground into a fight against inequality and for social justice; the fight against oppression by landlords, against caste discrimination, for labour rights and land rights. Everywhere they sought to mobilise the most marginalised people and demand their dignity be respected and their rights protected.

- Although government programmes, activists and scholars in India often consider Adivasis alongside Dalits as India’s most oppressed and poorest communities, in the hills where Adivasis had some direct access to land and forests, they were not dependent on other groups for their everyday survival in the way that Dalits were in the agricultural plains. This autonomy to sustain themselves on their own terms, though, has come to be persistently undermined.   
	The British colonial state and the Mughals before them nevertheless wanted revenue from their land as they did across the country. They introduced outsiders—usually higher castes from the plains—to control, ‘tame’ and settle the populations. The newcomers tried various strategies, like forcibly moving the people and resettling them in villages that looked more like those of the plains and indebting them through outside moneylenders, turning them into bonded labourers.   
From the late nineteenth century, alongside attempts at land settlement and alienation, commercial logging developed when the forests were found to be a rich resource. As the forests became ‘reserved’ or ‘protected’ the forest dwellers were slowly forced into more permanent settlements on the forest fringes. The settlement of the forests also introduced a new population of outsiders who came to work the forests and serve the markets opened by forest harvesting and moneylending.

- Rebellions in various parts of the central and eastern Indian hills arose across the late eighteenth, nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. One of the most striking of these rebellions (although not the first) was the Santhal Hul. It in fact began two years before the 1857 Sepoy Mutiny against the British East India Company that is otherwise thought of as India’s First War of Independence.    
	The rebellion that is perhaps the most well known is that of Birsa Munda in 1899–1901. Birsa’s portrait hangs in the Indian parliament as the only Adivasi to have such an honour. The Birsa movement became a historic marker of Adivasi resistance perhaps because in its aftermath some protective measures were finally put into place. Mediated by Christian missionaries, the Chotanagpur Tenancy Act—often considered the Magna Carta of the Adivasis—was an attempt to stop Adivasi land and forests from being sold off to outsiders so that they wouldn’t simply be turned into abject wage labour.

- Despite the introduction of various such land protection measures—which eventually got enshrined in the Fifth and Sixth Schedules of the Indian Constitution—these laws have been persistently undermined - the Indian state continued the exploitative legacy of the forests in new ways. From the seventies, after most of the forests had been depleted, the Indian forestry agenda turned from harvesting the forests to protecting them under a new conservation agenda that was taking over the world further curtailing the rights of Adivasis from those forests.   

	As their access to the resources around them was increasingly restricted, they also migrated seasonally as casual wage labour to do the most gruelling of works. Neither the British Raj nor the Indian state made substantive attempts to develop basic infrastructure for the people who lived in these regions. Efforts to encourage literacy were also negligible and in most of the villages, up to 90 per cent of the Adivasi population was illiterate. Subsequently, they not have enough education to consider applying for the ambitious constitutional provision for jobs in the state sector that were to be reserved for Adivasis and Dalits in proportion to their representation in the total population.   
	
	Adivasis could maintain their egalitarian countercultures partly because state officials had not taken an interest in co-opting them into their project of citizen-making, but especially because they still had some direct access to the material resources of forests and land, which gave them the autonomy to live on their own terms, and to reproduce their communities and values, without much interference from or being too dependent on others. It was in the lands of these relatively egalitarian communities that the Naxalite leaders found themselves, seeking to nurture their revolutionary struggle for an egalitarian society.


- Indian Maoist structure : The political wing is the Communist Party of India (Maoist) and the millitant wing is the People’s Liberation Guerrilla Army (PLGA). Heading it all, in a pyramidal structure, was the Central Committee with its Politburo overseeing the various State-level Committees that executed the political-organisational work of the movement.   
	Within each of these Maoist states were Regional Committees, followed by Zonal Committees, under which there were Area Committees overseeing the work of party cells and mass organisations (the latter were non-violent and led by and consisted of people who were not underground). These political structures were supported by the military force of the People’s Liberation Guerrilla Army. Villagers who wanted to join the armies were first recruited into local area squads. If they lasted, they would be promoted to a platoon (a force of about thirty soldiers), then a company (around eighty to ninety soldiers) and finally a battalion (of several hundred soldiers). Mass fronts were usually kept separate from the armies to protect them as they were open and not underground and therefore more vulnerable to state repression.

- The Indian state’s solution to this growing force was development under the barrel of a gun, The links between the economic growth model of the government and the war to be waged against the Maoists were explicit. The brain behind the offensive which followed, Home Minister P. Chidambaram (also the erstwhile finance minister), was previously a corporate lawyer representing several mining corporations as well as a non-executive director of Vedanta—a British mining company owned by the billionaire Anil Aggarwal—which planned to excavate bauxite in many parts of India.   
	The most brutal form of counterinsurgency measures began after the 2004–5 ‘peace negotiations’. In the Dandakaranya region of southern Chhattisgarh, to which the Naxalites had retreated after the repression in Andhra Pradesh, from 2006, local youth were armed and mobilised to cleanse the area of people in what was called _Salwa Judum_, meaning ‘purification hunt’ in the local Gondi language. Headed and nurtured by a local politician—who called the mobilisation a ‘Peace March’—the hunt recruited upwardly mobile educated youth from both the middle castes and the Adivasis, and backed by the police and government funding and weapons, they attacked the Adivasi villages and villagers who were seen as Naxalite supporters.

- In the 90s, there had been a major disagreement amongst the Naxalites about the correct interpretation of the Indian economy. It was a question about the extent to which India was ‘semi-feudal’ or ‘capitalist’, and the period went down in Naxalite history as ‘the two-line struggle’.   

	Was a feudal economy one in which land was colonised by just a rich minority with the rest of the population working for these landowners, partly bonded and indebted to them over generations? Was the presence of people selling their labour for a wage a sufficient condition to say that the economy had transited to a capitalist one, or did farmers also need to be accumulating and investing and reinvesting the surplus they generated from agricultural production to deserve this title for its economy?   

	How the economy was classified mattered to the guerrillas because it was the basis of the strategy they would use in their war. It determined the extent to which they would work in rural areas, as opposed to the cities. If they analysed the economy to be semi-feudal, they would fight an underground rural war. Whereas if capitalism was concluded to prevail, they would first pursue nonviolent mobilisation using parliamentary elections. I learnt from several people who left the revolutionaries that, in the ‘two-line struggle’ of the late nineties, not only were there internal disagreements about how to analyse the Indian economy, but also that democratic norms of discussion and debate within the party had been flouted. Despite research which showed otherwise, certain powerful leaders maintained that the country was semi-feudal; the analysis remained the same and therefore nothing changed.

- One idea that seemed crucial to keeping alive the dream of an ideal human community was sacrifice. Once seen as a means of appeasing and obliging the gods, by the end of the nineteenth century some scholars said sacrifice was about much more than the giving of gifts to deities. Though considered primarily in religious contexts, sacrifice became seen as a crucial means for people to enter an imagined world that is sacred, that is ‘other-worldly’, and bring its influence to bear in the world of their everyday lives, a world that was prosaic, transient and ordinary. Through this lens, the idea of sacrifice can be a supremely creative force. It enables people to transcend and overcome the ordinary world they live in, to join forces with the imagination of a different world, the world of the extraordinary, in order to create and breathe life from that ideal world into the here and now. People offering themselves in sacrifice can create new solidarities between themselves based on the idea of that extraordinary future world, which in turn would help build the utopian human community of their imagination in the present. Bearing this burden of the baggage bestowed by their privileged backgrounds, cutting ties with their families, crushing their personal histories and destroying their past personas were crucial measures for the Naxalite leaders to engender a new world.   

	Across the world, most acts of sacrifice take place through symbolic violence—for instance mutilations of the body, the killing of animals, or the consumption of food—where the body part, animal or food is a representation of the human participants making the offering. Such rituals represent people metaphorically crushing their everyday mundane worlds and symbolically killing themselves in order to participate in creating an immortal moral world which conquers, transforms and encompasses the world of the present. A central creative force in sacrifice, this rebounding violence negates the everyday world allowing its participants to reach out to something that surpasses it and then colonises it with the ideas of another world. Not innate to people, this violence is a symptom of their attempt to create a world beyond the one in which their everyday lives are trapped.   

	Superhuman goals like that striven for by Naxal leaders—the creation of an ideal world with an equal and democratic human community in the here and now—are so set against the values of the everyday world that surrounds them that they come at considerable human cost. The greatest sacrificial force is the giving of human life itself: human sacrifice. When revolutionaries sacrificed themselves and thus the world around them to create a world of their dreams, their death and destruction would regenerate life itself to become creative forces.

- The direct opposite of sacrifice, its antonym, is suicide. Commenting on a friend who had hanged himself from a ceiling fan, Gyanji once scoffed, ‘What an individualistic selfish act! It is for nobody. It does not contribute, create or construct anything. The struggle against self-seeking individualistic thinking is harder than the struggle against the enemy.’ I think that Gyanji saw suicide as the consequence of an individual leaving one moral world but with no other world to create. A place of torment caused by insatiable passions and limitless desires that can never be fulfilled, because there is no creative project to make and contain them.

- That is perhaps why the rituals of martyrdom, celebrated in the month of November in an annual festival in villages across their strongholds, were the most important celebration for the Naxalites. Martyrs’ Day marked the death of people who had sacrificed their lives to create a new moral world, transforming them into immortal celestial bodies leading the path forward, passing on the dreams of an imagined future society, entrusting others to realise them. Martyrdom transformed the emotions provoked by the brutal deaths of comrades in the struggle from being a sentimental weakness into a powerful creative emotional force, fighting the cause of the oppressed, representing the future utopian world, the abstraction of an ideal to lead the revolutionary struggle. Martyrdom enabled the creation of the perfect revolutionary, fighting the cause of the oppressed, representing the future utopian world, the abstraction of an ideal to lead the revolutionary struggle.   

	Martyrs gave the life-transcending permanence that was necessary to penetrate the present world with ideas of the extraordinary future world the guerrillas wanted to create. The burden of the martyrs contained a legacy; it was the means by which those in the movement sought to constantly improve themselves; it was the essence of what it means to be the perfect human.   

	On the one hand, Hindu, Buddhist or Jain monks renounce the hierarchies of their society to liberate themselves individually from the endless cycles of rebirth to reach an eventual future world of equality. On the other hand, India’s Naxalite guerrillas break with their pasts to commit to a casteless and classless community, seeking to liberate the whole of society for a more equal future to be fought for in the present. Whereas one seeks emancipation for the individual in the future, the other works for the ideal of liberation for communal ends in the present. But both involve a conviction and commitment, a faith in the means to an end, which, like following a religious doctrine, is hard to shake. They are both willing to sacrifice everything, including themselves, to attain their ideals of liberation. Taking up arms is then merely one of the means to this end. Whether one agrees with these revolutionary methods or not, the hierarchies of Indian society have themselves produced some of the world’s most committed pursuers of a more equal society.

- As is so often the case with war, the poor were now being used to fight the poor. Targeted recruitment of Adivasi boys into the police and the security forces had begun. In neighbouring states like Chhattisgarh, the police had armed Adivasi boys as Special Police Officers and armed Adivasi vigilante groups, recruiting from the very communities the Naxalites lived amidst, pitting the poor against the poor to kill each other.    
	In the end they would never get rid of the politicians who collaborated with the multinational companies and created government economic policy that generated inequality; instead, the Naxalites would kill the hundreds of young Adivasi soldiers who were being used by the state armies. The young men who fronted the security forces would be the Naxalites’ first casualties. The state repression of the kind being generated against them dangerously reduced their revolutionary activities to military strategy alone. In the face of this despair, it was hard to keep hope alive, making it far too easy to start replicating the violence of the oppressor. This state repression, he continued, gave them little space to work with the people. It did not allow them to develop political consciousness, political education or mass mobilisation. The danger, he said, was that people joined the Maoists without sharing their vision and imagination of a different world. And in that context, the gun became just a means of accelerating their upward social mobility within the very systems the Maoists sought to crush.

---

- Adivasi youths running away from home to live with the guerrilla armies and Adivasis escaping home for six months of the year to carry bricks in the kilns at the peripheries of India’s growing metropolitan cities is comparable. Despite the horrific work conditions, the youths perceived their own participation in this migration as a temporary space away from the constraints of village life. Freedom from parents, freedom to live out their fantasies with prohibited love affairs and an opportunity to see a different world. Comparatively, in the guerrilla armies there was the opportunity to learn to read and write, acquire medical skills, and operate new technologies—mobile phones, computers and guns. And although the guerrillas were not paid, there were also no contractors who swindled them.

- Security and conflict experts have debated whether people are coerced, or whether it is ‘greed’ or ‘grievance’ that leads them to throw in their lot with rebel movements such as the Naxalites. In the absence of adequate reporting and research, the situation infamously referred to in Guatemala as ‘caught between two armies’ became known in India as the ‘sandwich theory’ where people were sandwiched between the fire of the state and that of the Maoists. Slowly, first-hand accounts of these regions emerged, giving more agency to people’s involvement with the guerrillas.   

	Just as the debates on the Vietnam War had drawn attention to the rational cost-calculating economic peasant who participated in revolution only to improve his future position, and others have more recently emphasised the role of ‘greed’ in their econometric analysis of worldwide civil conflicts, in India some analysts have stressed the significance of utilitarian benefits in joining the rebels. It was no coincidence that the rebels were found in India’s mineral-rich areas for it was the prospect of extortion from that wealth which explained their proliferation.

- Rejecting the role of ‘greed’, others stressed the role of ‘grievance’ and the significance of the ‘moral economy’ in granting people the agency to participate in the insurgency. They focused on the significance of extensive poverty, low literacy rates, limited employment opportunities, social oppression and human rights violations, which moved people into rebellion; those on the margins of survival joined the guerrillas because the insurgents addressed their grievances. Regardless of the success or failure of their programmes and campaigns, the much deeper appeal of the Naxalites was the respect and dignity with which they treated the Adivasis, looking upon them as equal human beings.   

	What mattered the most in winning over Adivasis was the Naxalite ideology of egalitarianism which guided their humaneness and nurtured easily overlooked subtle interactions between people, the Naxalite ability to develop relations of emotional intimacy, based on their egalitarian ideals, is why boys felt comfortable joining the guerrilla armies and had faith in leaders. The egalitarian values that led them to treat others as equal human beings also explained why Naxalite armies were considered a sanctuary for society’s misfits. While the Indian government keenly represented the guerrillas as terrorising and coercing Adivasis into the movement, Adivasi youth moved freely in and out of the guerrilla armies, almost like they were visiting an uncle or an aunt. It was the ideology of the Naxalites—the priority they gave to developing egalitarian values—that generated their daily efforts to supersede the deep hierarchies of caste and class that mark Indian society,

- The Adivasi rebellions of the late 1800s against the colonial government taking over their land had, with the intervention of some Christian missionaries, eventually resulted in special protection being granted to Adivasi lands. Only an Adivasi could buy the land of another Adivasi. These protection measures were constitutionally reinforced and other laws were added—such as the need for the consensus of at least 80 per cent of the local people to buy their land. Although Memoranda of Understanding had been signed between large multinational corporations and the government, it wasn’t easy to acquire land. Human rights activists had claimed that this was the real reason behind ‘Operation Green Hunt’. In the name of fighting the guerrillas, the government was covering the rich mining areas with military barracks to make life brutally unpleasant, accusing locals who did not comply with them of being Maoists so that eventually they would either be forced to leave or could simply be arrested or killed. It was a slow clearing of the ground, a slow purging of the people.

- High-caste prejudice—the flip side of the image of the wildness, savagery and barbarism of the Adivasi was an idea of their innocence, vulnerability and gullibility. Despite their egalitarian ideals, which seemed to have won the guerrillas some success in attracting Adivasis to their movement, it seemed hard for even the most sensitive leaders to overcome these deep-seated high-caste stigmas towards India’s tribes. For a movement so keen on building an egalitarian world, ultimately their path seemed to be based on ignoring the forms of egalitarianism that were already alive and well in Adivasi communities.   
	It was an issue that had divided the communist movement. There were people still debating what Marx and Engels had really thought about the Russian mir, a form of early common ownership of land, and whether it could pass directly from that peasant form to higher forms of communist common ownership, or whether it was necessary for Russia to go through the same process of historical development as England had and which included the spread of capitalism.

- Young Adivasi men often went away from the squads and did not return. It was then that the Naxalites felt they had failed in delivering a political education. People came to them from very different backgrounds, he said, but they needed to be educated to recognise the violence and inequities around them, and to want to change the world. They needed to be prepared, he said, to take on not just the world around them but also the structures and injustices that they could not see. They needed to understand the Naxalite programme of long preparation to seize power and commit to it. The Naxalites even viewed pornography as part of the spread of a feudal imperialist culture that used sex as a weapon to divert the youths from the problems and struggles of society.

---

- With neither a trade in drugs nor a rich foreign backer, and with all their activities officially banned as ‘terrorist’, the guerrillas relied on tapping pre-existing black markets in the areas of their operation. In particular, they had three main sources of funds: large-scale corporations (like mining operations); the illicit economy of forest products (especially kendu leaves); and the black economy around state infrastructural development projects (such as the building of roads). With the threat of violence affirmed by their clandestine armies, the Naxalites replaced the earlier state-contractor nexus of black markets in areas they wanted to control.


- The method of access to funding from which these ‘earnings’ were syphoned was dependent on the source. For large corporations, including mining operations, the Naxalites demanded a ‘tax’ from the managers in return for not interfering with their operations. While on the one hand they held rallies against the multinational corporations behind the mining operations, on the other hand, they did not destroy the mining operations altogether.  

	For instance, the easiest bombing target—a 267-kilometre-long Essar pipeline transporting iron ore slurry—was left largely untouched. The pipeline ran straight through the heart of the guerrilla territory in the forests of Bastar, Chhattisgarh. The tacit co-existence of the Maoists and mining companies made global headlines when, in 2010, Wikileaks released a diplomatic cable sent by the US consulate in Mumbai. The cable quoted an Essar representative who claimed that the company paid significant amounts of money to the underground guerrillas in Chhattisgarh to safeguard Essar plants.  

	In the big picture of future development, Gyanji had said that they were not against mining per se as it was crucial for the advancement of any society. What they were against was the way in which private companies exploited the labour force to ruthlessly accumulate all the profits.

- When the Naxalites came into an area, one of the first things they did was to negotiate their way into these social networks of contractors and politicians and to make their own demands of a share of the illicit funds. By gatecrashing the local black markets in this fashion, the Naxalites not only gained funds, they also changed the terms of operation. They introduced their own rules about how fund extraction should take place, how much money was to be taken, and who should be responsible for it. They also set up regulations about how the loot should be distributed—what proportion of the money should be spent on village health clinics, education in the armies, legal fees for political prisoners, and arms.  

	Those projects considered to be for the public good were not to be touched; the entire budget amount allocated for construction was to go into the building. This included the building of schools, health centres and all small projects such as the construction of wells and hand pumps. However, other projects—such as the building of roads or bridges—were a major source of funds for the guerrillas.

- In the black market of forest products—a third source of funding for the Naxalites—the collection of kendu leaves was the most lucrative. When the Maoists infiltrated this economy, they once again created their own rules at several stages. On the one hand, they doubled the wages of the Adivasi and low-caste labourers who brought the leaves from the forests and demanded that the contractors provided the collectors rice puffs and jaggery for each day that they went searching for leaves. On the other hand, because they controlled the trade of the leaves through the contractors, in effect, they also controlled the prices and profits, enabling them to get a slice of the funds.

	When the Naxalites arrived, they replaced these wealthy town-based Hindu and Muslim elite contractors with the more impoverished of the village middle castes and Muslims who continued to live in the villages. Democratising contract-running in this manner, the Naxalites also nurtured villagers whose compliance and support they could better rely on (than the old elites) because of the patronage they had received from the guerrillas in getting these new opportunities to prosper

- The Naxalites seemed to turn a blind eye to the changes in their village-level workers and the fact that they seemed to look more and more like the elites they had replaced. They needed the infrastructure that these men could now offer. Yet, at the same time, they knew that these men were also probably becoming their weakest link within the villages—those most likely to betray them as police informers—as their support was largely utilitarian, predicated on the fact that they were prospering through their involvement with the Naxalites.

	Entering the black economy to generate capital to fund the Naxalites meant intimate contact with the established elites of the contractor-politician-state official nexus—the rich, well-connected classes and castes. In this process, without a strong counterculture, it was all too easy for them to internalise some of the capitalist and hierarchical caste values of these elites and seek to differentiate themselves from others, reproducing the inequalities that these values generated. This included the desire for the accumulation of private property, the increasing conflation of status with the acquisition of private wealth, the necessity to flaunt this wealth through conspicuous consumption and adopt increasingly patriarchal attitudes towards women.

	In giving more people the opportunity to accumulate a profit in this black economy, the Naxalites unwittingly spread the values of those elites more widely among the villagers and their own ranks. It was ironic that this movement for a communist future inadvertently brought the state closer to Adivasi lives, accelerated the spread of the values of capitalism and caste hierarchies amongst them, and thereby undermined its own visions for a communist society. The Naxalite aim was to create a casteless and classless society, but it was also accelerating class differentiation and at the same time nurturing some of the hierarchal values of caste amongst Adivasis.

---

- It is true that history has shown us that in situations of extreme violence and oppression, counter-violence may be the only way to achieve justice. And indeed, when one travels across the Indian countryside and witnesses the violence of systematic neglect and oppression that has been wrought on India’s low castes and tribes, it is often hard not to feel that the only way to change things is for them to take up arms to make their demands. The danger, however, it seemed to me, is that this counter-violence becomes the purpose, a force that is an end in itself, and that the broader aims of achieving power through collective social change takes a backseat.

- Gyanji reflected, Dalits and other low castes (he excluded Adivasis who have historically lived with more autonomy) who rose within the Naxalites’ ranks often have an inferiority complex as they have suffered historic humiliation from those above them in the caste hierarchy, and this complex is dangerous. They want to undo the wrongs they have suffered and the injustices they have seen, but the result is that they can become extremely sectarian, Gyanji explained. Although they can fight for justice for their communities, when the fight becomes more abstract, for a different world for everyone—for a communist society—it is much harder for them to commit. Communism everywhere, Gyanji reflected, has usually failed to raise leaders from the working classes, the peasants; leadership remains the privilege of the educated bourgeoisie.

- Including the PLFI (# People's Liberation Front of India) & TPC (Tritiya Prashul Comitee), there were at least half a dozen such outfits in Jharkhand. MMMC, JPC, JLT—a spate of acronyms—whose roots could all be traced to Naxalites who had been expelled from the struggle and who had subsequently mobilised people of their own caste against the guerrillas. They also accumulated wealth using the threat of their guns in their areas of operation through levies on development, forest products and mining. Some, like the TPC and PLFI, lasted several years and managed to grow—at points—to a couple of hundred members. But many fizzled out within the space of a few months or their members were killed.

	The Naxalites claimed that these gangs were state supported. It was rare, they said, for the police to kill or incarcerate gang members. Senior police officers themselves had admitted that these groups were different from the Naxalites—there was no ideological motivation to their struggle; they were purely extortion rackets, or ‘money-minting’ machines.

---

- After years of internal critique, the Maoists had come to recognise the importance of gender. Just as ‘caste’ could not be ignored as simply ‘superstructure’ in favour of a more important focus on economic and material relations that were called the ‘base-structure’ or ‘infrastructure’, gender relations could not be left to culture, subjective relations and the private domain. It was not enough to make the argument: ‘Let’s fight the war first; we will deal with gender later.’ That would only pave the way for patriarchal authoritarian men to dominate the new future communities aspiring to be egalitarian. Gender equality had to be fought for during the struggle, addressed in the very ways through which social relations were nurtured amidst cadres and sympathisers to reflect—at least in the guerrilla strongholds—their ideal future communities.

- Women in the villages were vital for providing logistical support to the Naxalites—giving food, acting as couriers, caring for sick comrades in their homes and even hiding the guerrillas. They were also crucial in the protests organised by the Naxalites, often placed in the forefront of rallies. Like the Adivasi men in those regions, the women had nowhere else to run to and were left to choose between the brutality of life in the prison-like refugee camps that the Indian state had erected on the roadsides, escaping over the border to a different state, or roaming the forests with the guerrillas.

- Most men in the leadership found it difficult to deal with gender equality. There were always other, more important, needs of war. So, unless it was to celebrate a good woman fighter, gender issues were better left to women. That’s how gender inequities perpetuated themselves—by acknowledging the significance of gender relations as ‘the women’s issue’ and making a separate wing for women headed by women for women to deal with. In that process, women and gender relations were too easily ghettoised and became of secondary concern.
- There was a necessity to understand the specificities of gender relations in particular contexts and not assume a universal notion of women’s subordination and oppression. The idea of a ‘universal Indian woman’—the ‘patriarchally oppressed’, ‘disadvantaged woman’ in need of ‘empowerment’—was one too easily created by the middle classes and higher castes. Rarely did NGO workers appear to understand what was really going on in these Adivasi households or had the opportunity to take the time to understand their specificities. The result was an assumption that Adivasi gender inequalities were similar to those found in other Indian communities.

	In non-Adivasi-dominated areas and amongst Hinduised non-Adivasi communities, the Naxalite anti-alcohol campaigns were perhaps warranted. Making and drinking beer and wine, men and women together, signified Adivasi women’s relatively egalitarian status in relation to their men. In destroying these cultural markers, were the Maoists harassing those women whose cause they wished to serve? Assumptions of feudalism and patriarchy within Adivasi households, in this respect, were not only out of place but potentially damaging.

	But Indian society is noted for a toxic mix of the effects of caste and class that is particularly lethal for the 	fate of women. The further you move up the caste hierarchy, the less the autonomy for women, who are usually confined to domestic life in their homes. Moreover, when low castes become upwardly mobile and aspire to be middle-class, they often reproduce these upper-caste norms. Challenges to economic inequality through the upward mobility of low castes, therefore, can actually increase gender inequities within households as patriarchy emerges where it had barely touched before. The problem, in the Maoist case, was the combination of status and upward mobility that being with the movement could bring. The irony of the situation—that perhaps it was the Maoists who were helping to promote and encourage the rise of patriarchal attitudes within Adivasi societies.

	Engels notes that with the development of capitalism and the need to transmit wealth across generations, we have seen the increasing enslavement of women in monogamous family structures.

- Maoist leaders were concerned about the widespread media propaganda against them. Male leaders were accused of sexually exploiting low-caste female cadres. They wanted to maintain a ‘pure image’ of the movement, far from condoning casual sexual encounters. Any romantic liaisons were disrupted by the Maoists by assigning the couple to different platoons, by suspending one partner for a while, or, most commonly, by encouraging their marriage to make them ‘legitimate’.

- Permission to marry had to be sought from the movement’s leadership and would be determined by showing that the desire to be together was not just sexual but would help the revolutionary cause. Marriages were assumed to be lifelong partnerships, and the conjugal union was to be a democratic one, prohibiting inequalities of any kind between the husband and the wife. Couples had to be prepared to spend long periods apart due to the demands of war.

	Ultimately though, what was or wasn’t a problem would be decided by a male high-caste leadership and it seemed that the emphasis on marriage—as the only legitimate way in which two people could be close—was about controlling women.

---

- War usually has beginnings, climaxes and ends, and the experience of it is sometimes described as long periods of boredom punctuated by short moments of excitement. But this kind of guerrilla war seemed above all else an eternal march of endurance to erase one’s presence from a place and, at the same time, to survive in it. In some ways the seemingly endless quality, and the ups and downs, of the nightmarch seemed to be an encapsulation of the Naxalite struggle itself—its meanderings, let-downs, and puzzling persistence.

- The South Asia Terrorism Portal claims that over 6,000 naxals have surrendered across the country. But scholars, lawyers and human rights activists have said that many of these surrenders are ‘fake’ and that Adivasis are being coerced. In Jharkhand, the National Human Rights Commission said that between 2012 and 2014 more than 500 Adivasi youths who had no links with the Naxalites were made to surrender.2 Human rights activists also report that 4,000 Adivasis charged as ‘Naxalite’ are in the prisons of Jharkhand and kept incarcerated for years on end without trial.

	In a context of extreme state-repression the revolutionary guerrillas can easily be reduced to a movement of brute force, especially if they retract from being a broad-based organisation looking after the concerns of local people.

--- 
