### Sebastian And Sons: A Brief History Of The Mrdangam Makers (T. M. Krishna)

###### Note: Mrdangam making styles from Thanjavur, Madras are majorly discussed. Also included are brief discussions on makers from Palakkad, Andhra and Bangalore.

- The home of the holy trinity—Thyagaraja, Muthusvami Dikshitar and Syama Sastri—Thanjavur has an unbroken tradition of Karnatik music, Harikatha, Namasankirtana and Bharatanatyam (or Sadir, as it was in its earlier form practised by the devadasis). In 1676, Ekoji became the first Maratha ruler of Thanjavur. Along with the change in governance came the Maharashtrian cultural influx. The Naradiya tradition of Harikatha became a mainstay in the brahmin quarters of Thanjavur and its surrounding areas. At these presentations, mrdangam artists of Maratha origin used to accompany the kirtankar.

- A deliberate ‘forgetfulness’ about the older style is caused by the fact that, by the mid-twentieth century, the Maratha-influenced Thanjavur tradition became the brahmin style, while the tavil- and Sadir-inspired Pudukkottai tradition became associated with the isai vellalar aesthetic. In those older times, of course, it was unthinkable for brahmins to be playing this skin instrument. The mrdangam was played by the isai vellalar community—consisting of nadasvaram and tavil artists, male conductors of Sadir performances and devadasis—or Maratha non-brahmin musicians.

- The uncomfortable truth that this paternalistic feudalism was a form of validation for the makers must not be brushed under the carpet. Being needed and valued by someone in a position of social power, and the dissolving of physical barriers and the stigma of caste, gave the maker a sense of equality. The mrdangam player was in desperate need of someone to fulfil a certain need, a job they could not imagine doing themselves. When social changes exerted pressure on the existing ways of doing things, something had to give. Possibly, this also created a need for artists to present themselves as forward-thinking.

- This entire celebration of the past and present, which is couched in belonging, comes from caste privilege. The privileged find ways of recording memories—through narrations, paintings, vessels, heirlooms, rituals, clothes and recipes. And within these carriers are transferred character sketches, jokes, smiles, disagreements and celebrations. The negative characters in our families too are given a role; their actions condemned, trivialised or jocularly set aside. But for an individual from a marginalised caste, history is a burden of emotional, intellectual, aesthetic and economic denial and deprivation. Memory decides that forgetting is its job in the hope that the scars might disappear and explanations become unnecessary. Father and grandfather are remembered by name and function alone. Villages are not remembered, timelines erased and, often, names are blurred or altered. Even that which is recalled is not alive; it is just an event, something that happened. In a sense, this also defines how their present is viewed by society at large. These are people who have been barred from the memory of culture and society, looked at as tools, their entire intellectual and emotional being reduced to the service they provide. They too are socialised to believe in this contract.

- For the older generation of makers from Thanjavur—who made the transition to Madras, and for whom the umbilical cord of the work is the personal relationship with the artist—change has been difficult to digest. They recognise that there is a measure of caste-based discrimination, yet miss something of the old feudal set-up, perhaps the strange intimacy of it. These makers seem to differentiate between the previous generation and themselves, and believe that their own relationships with artists evolved into a different connection. In the current relationship between the maker and the artist, they perceive a distancing: mere functionality, a job sans the personal touch. They position themselves as the mean between the ugly distant past and utilitarian present, and this is beautifully explained in something a maker said to me, ‘Those days they kept us away and discriminated; today they keep us close and discriminate.’ Their past and their present encapsulated in one line.

  Their work has become contractual; therefore, the labourer–employer structure is more starkly visible. For him, the older model smothered this reality. When the maker had access to the player’s personal spaces and life, and worked within that domain, there was the delusionary comfort of a personal bond that both masked the labour involved and allowed them to make excuses for casteist behaviour. Even if the artist does not help, the lady of the house would do something for them, they say. Makers saw this as closeness, an atmosphere of working together, a fusing of sorts.

  Another analogy further explains the problem with this notion. ‘The relationship between the vidvan (an honorific often used for seasoned artists) and the worker is like that of a husband and wife. Only if there are arguments and disagreements between the husband and the wife will the family move ahead. In the mix is also the knowledge that, if they are ostracised, they can survive, either by pulling a rickshaw or daily labour. As a maker said, ‘I am ready to do the lowest work. But the mrdangam artist cannot—he will have to answer societal questions.’ Implicit in this assertion about being willing to do the lowest of jobs is the claim of a higher status for his current work that caters to the brahmin’s art world.

- There is also the knowledge that the player is dependent on the maker. It lends a certain charge to their uneven relationship: the players have no choice, they cannot work with skin. There is a kind of helplessness associated with the artist’s need, one that may even be internalised as power by the makers. The profession is then seen as a form of emancipation, which in turn keeps the makers deferential and compliant in a subordinate relationship.

- The unfortunate truth is that none of the older mrdangam players I interviewed spoke of affection, though there is an occasional reference to a maker as an almost-son. To them, the makers were always ‘workers’ even when they said ‘he was like my son’. Right through my interviews, the term used to describe them was ‘worker’ or ‘labourer’—not ‘maker’. The other word artists used was ‘repairer’. There was no exception, absolutely none. The instrument is made by the maker in its entirety, and later he helps in its maintenance, but he is never credited with the creation itself.

  What happens when you label something as labour? It is characterised as a mechanical operation that lacks intellectual value or creative energies. The individuals engaged in that act are also reduced to just bodies and their work to supply. Social hierarchies like caste allow divisions to flourish with impunity, so everyone, even the oppressed, buys into it.

- I wanted to understand how makers of earlier generations viewed discrimination. What I discovered was that, coming from the dalit community that had a rare direct link with brahmins because of an artistic necessity, they perceived discrimination only in terms of untouchability. In other words, the sharing of space, air, time, food and art was seen as castelessness.

- A different manifestation of caste seems to be at work now. Paul speaks of how mrdangam artists are putting out videos on social media about the making of the instrument, thereby implying that they are doing and can do all the work involved, which is of course untrue. By claiming knowledge of workmanship, artists are now infringing upon the maker’s area of expertise, and the latter see it (quite rightly) as coming from a sense of caste and class superiority.

- Several makers also pointed out that mrdangam artists were unwilling to teach them. Today, some people show willingness, but it is too late for the makers I interviewed. Artists expect that the sons of the makers will carry on the profession. When a mrdangam maker approached an artist for a job reference, the artist responded with an assurance to help him rise as a maker. When another argued over retirement benefits, the artist assured him that he would employ the maker’s son too. The sons of these musicians are these days employed in the information technology industry, as chartered accountants or in the management sector in India or the US. Yet, the players expect the sons of makers to be mrdangam makers. One

- Mrdangam artist Kalidas made a keen observation. He said that people from other communities entering the field of mrdangam-making is a very recent phenomenon. Need, he believed, drives them to these opportunities, but they are all exceptions to the rule. He was right; the presence of makers from non-dalit castes is still a rarity. The process of making a tavil is divided among many people. Nevertheless, it appears that the procurement and initial work with the hide still remained with the dalit community. As we move down the pecking order of caste, the occupational divide between the artist and the maker shrinks. So, those occupying the lowest rungs play a dual role: a dalit or tribal percussion artist is also the maker of the instrument he plays.

- When it came to isai vellalar musicians, brahmin protectionism kicked in. when an isai vellalar became a maker, there was greater comfort in the interaction. They were not competing for the same space as the brahmin mrdangam artist, but offering a service from a lower rank. Secondly, now the players did not need to associate only with the dalits for their mrdangam work.

- The jacktree's wood is the holy grail of mrdangams. There is a stage before we even get to the leather—and that is selecting and seasoning the wood that forms the shell of the instrument. This is what the asaris traditionally do. The asaris are members of the vishwakarma community. Categorised as OBC (other backward castes) by the government of India, they occupy the lower rungs of the caste order. Once designers of great temples and monuments, they are now invisible.

- Much like the techniques of mrdangam-making, the art of creating wooden shells was refined only in the early part of the twentieth century, at least as far as we can tell. With the Thanjavur makers, we are able to trace a history stretching back to the early twentieth century, but very little is known about the woodcrafters’ work culture in the past. These crafters make wooden shells for the mrdangam, tavil, tabla, udukkai, pambai, chenda and urmi.

  Irrespective of whether they were from Thanjavur, Chennai, Peruvemba, Bangalore or someplace in Andhra Pradesh, the mrdangam makers took pride in their work, and were always ready to explain its technical and artistic niceties and nuances. The story with the woodcrafters was very different. They have no direct engagement with the actual sound that emanates from the mrdangam. The shell leaves their workshop, never to return, and they do not hear an artist test the instrument or even go to a concert.

- The shell is referred to as the kattai— the wood. It was no longer only a resonating chamber, but an entity that was capable of coming alive with sound, and with colour, rings and various marks on its body. Thinking of kattais in this manner shifts our engagement as a listener.

  The two apertures of the hollow kattai are covered with membranes made of animal hide. The dominant end has a smaller aperture, and this is what faces the audience in a typical performance. This is called the *valandalai*, the right-side head. The larger aperture on the other side has a characteristic bass tone and is called the *toppi*, and its resonances are in the lower registers. The valandalai is the predominant, assertive side of the instrument. The toppi lends support. It is the valandalai that is tuned to the tonic of the singer or instrumentalist whom the mrdangam artist is accompanying, or, in the case of a mrdangam solo, to a specific tonic of the mrdangam artist’s own choosing. 

- When non-dalit makers speak of the Thanjavur family, they accuse them of using substandard material or lying to artists about its source (e.g. they use skin bought in Chennai but inform their clients that it was directly sourced from Thanjavur). At some point, almost everyone makes some ‘adjustments’ in their work, so it is not entirely unlikely that some of them do this. What matters here is not the truth or untruth of these accusations, but the fact that they are made only against makers of certain castes.

- A careful listening to some of the older artists—predating the Mani Iyers and Palanis—gives us a glimpse into the role and intentionality of the mrdangam artist. There was a time when its rhythm was interwoven with the melody of the voice and the violin or vina. Its role was subdued and had a flowing gait to it. This changed dramatically with the Mani Iyer–Palani generation. There was a greater frontal display of individuality, an emphasis on the rhythmic aspects of every composition and of the mrdangam artist’s own presence on stage. Listen to any recording of Mani Iyer or Palani, and you are immediately struck by their obvious boldness. The mrdangam artist’s search for a more aggressive musical expression drove many of the instrument’s physical and aesthetic changes. It was an exploration driven by the artists’ desire for attention and for a greater focus on the mrdangam artist during a concert. This required structural changes to the form, presentation and appearance of the performative act. All of which have entirely succeeded in changing the music and position of the mrdangam.

  To my mind, at least part of this need for a larger mrdangam was driven by male testosterone. The early mrdangam was barely more than the seated width of the artist himself. Now it was heavy and solid—burly, you could say. The kattais are usually 22 inches in length for female tonics and 24 inches for male tonics.

- Buffalo skin makes up two layers used for the toppi, goat skin being the third. When makers need skin, a buffalo is chosen specifically for this purpose from the lot that has made it to the slaughterhouse. Another lie perpetrated by some artists is that only the skin of animals that die naturally is used. In an animal that dies a natural death, the blood clots, and the skin becomes like cardboard, unusable for a maker.

  When it comes to goat skin, they want black goats. There should be spots on the skin, specifically for toppi skin. The hair should be soft on those spots, as that provides better resonance. There is logic in everything

- Being in the business of skin is not easy. Everything goes against the makers: their caste, economic standing and social location. People do not like that their area is being downgraded because of the skin and leather strewn around. Complaining about the dirtiness of the work indirectly and derogatorily points at the makers’ caste. Sowriar’s wife, Sarada, told me that most brahmin mrdangam artists from Mylapore have no issues with their presence. It is the non-brahmin Hindu middle class that gives them a hard time. This could also be because the makers’ homes and shops are usually cheek-by-jowl with the properties owned by people belonging to socially mid-level non-brahmin castes. They share small square feet areas with the makers, and are uncomfortable with the scent of freshly peeled skin. If the makers are shunted out, these complainers have nothing to lose. For the mrdangam artists, though, the makers are indispensable and their proximity is a necessary condition.

  Most artists are brahmins. They don’t like the smell and don’t know anything about how to process the skin. But the instrument will be in their pooja room. The makers are not given that respect. The maker stands at the threshold, keeping the cow and the brahmin apart, helping the latter maintain his ‘purity’. So, the maker is vital for the player, yet his role also keeps the maker ‘polluted’ and unequal.

- The valandalai of the mrdangam has three layers of skin, each with a different utility. The bottom-most one is usually cow skin and is known as the okkarara thattu, which means ‘that which it sits on’. This layer sits on the wood, and the two musically functional thattus sit on it. The role of the okkarara thattu is to be a cushion between the wooden frame and the other thattus; it has no tonal role.

  The middle layer is goat skin. This is called kottu thattu, cut out from either side of the goat’s vertebrae. The makers call it sama thattu, meaning its gauge is equal all over. For the valandalai, the thattu has to be sama thattu, because any variation in gauge will affect the tuning of it to a designated pitch.

  The last cow skin layer, right on top, is called the vettu thattu. Vettu means ‘to cut’, and that is exactly what is done: it is an annular layer. A circle is cut in the centre of this thattu in such a manner that the kottu thattu below is exposed.

  There is a fairly prominent, black, round area on the mrdangam’s playing surface, which faces the audience. This black patch is on the kottu thattu, the goat-skin second layer, and is made of a paste that contains finely powdered kittankallu and cooked rice. Kittankallu, also known as chittankallu, is made up of fayalite (94 per cent) and hercynite (6 per cent). This paste of cooked rice and kittankallu, sadam, is crucial to the sound of the mrdangam. The sadam acts as a load (an added weight) on the membrane. It is this load that provides the valandalai its harmonics. Without it, the mrdangam cannot be tuned to the desired tonics.

  According to the Thanjavur makers, the kittankallu is irreplaceable in the preparation of sadam. But makers in Madras, Peruvemba and Andhra use stones found in their own localities. Madras makers get their stones from Red Hills, Manimangalam or Maraimalai Nagar. Every one of these stones was high in iron content, but it was the sample from Tada that had the highest percentage of iron (ferrous), 73.2 per cent—much more than the much-touted kittankallu, which contained 53.4 per cent iron (ferrous and some ferric). Other than the Tada stone, all the other samples also revealed the presence of quartz. Each stone, and the sadam derived from it, gives the mrdangam a distinct aesthetic presence. There cannot be ‘only one’. Needless to say, the Thanjavur makers will swear that theirs is the best. There have been experiments with replacements for this kind of stone: sand, crushed bricks, talcum powder, turmeric powder, but nothing worked.

- In the Palakkad style, gum made of kunnikuru (Abrus precatorius) is used as the foundation paste, as according to the makers, kunnumani will adhere twice as strongly as rice. The Kerala makers are able to generate a lot of sound from the valandalai in spite of cutting very little skin out of the vettu thattu. Unlike people who work in Tamil Nadu or Karnataka, the makers of Kerala source all their skin from within the state.

- The finishing stages of the mrdangam requires multitasking, checking three kinds of tuning. One, bringing down the pitch of the valandalai with every layer of sadam, and two, ensuring that the pitch at all the kannus are aligned so that there is no ecchu–taggu. At the same time, the sound emanating from the vettu thattu and that which comes from the kottu thattu must also be in tune. Constantly checking, the maker alters the way he applies the sadam depending on all these factors: closer circles, wider circles, maybe even closer to a specific kannu, hitting on the pinnal from below or above and fiddling with the varu tightness. This is a complex tuning methodology.

  The final shape of the sadam is idli-like, concave and thinning towards the edges of the kottu thattu. That is, there is more sadam at the centre when compared to the edge. The concavity varies from maker to maker, and depends on the tonic to which the mrdangam is being tuned. The sadam lasts anywhere between one and five concerts, the longevity depending on how well it has been applied, the style of playing and the artist’s hands. 

- Caste is an intellectual, emotional, psychological and physical assertion of power. In this case, a community that considers its own abilities as being beyond the physical, derives power from instructing another to do the corporeal work. Bundled in this is an underlying feeling among the artist community that their work is above all these temporal activities. However, they are able to control and push people who are physically better endowed. That their elevated virtuosity depends on material effort is explained away as a willing contribution by the makers—imagine, these people (makers) are able to associate with the likes of Mani Iyer or Palani. Perhaps many players have not consciously thought in this manner, but it would still be a pretence not to acknowledge the inner workings of the player–maker equation.

- Who is the source of the sound? How did the dead and the alive come together in this composition? When the cow, goat and buffalo skins listen to each other, respond to one another’s movements, collide and partner, music happens. Who created the sound?

  What about the mrdangam artist? Is it his sound? How can he take sole ownership of something that comes from so many elements? One element in this chain moves away from its designated place and the music stops. The wooden frame placed on the artist’s legs anchors everything. But, before the artist enters the picture, it is the maker who brings various textures, colours, sounds and shapes together by twisting, turning, stretching, breaking, crushing, washing, coating, cutting and binding it all together with his body. The maker is the Cupid.

  The two tenuously connected worlds: the upper-caste performance and learning environment on the one end and the marginalised mrdangam maker on the other. They overlap only for convenience, and remain socially and aesthetically disengaged. This separation conveniently reinforces the brahminical lie that caste is varna (occupation- or ability-based social hierarchy) and not jati (birth-based social hierarchy). And this results in cultural ‘othering’.

- It is only over the past 120 years that Karnatik concerts have proliferated in public spaces—exponentially increasing the number of participating musicians, and thus the demand for mrdangams. As Bharatanatyam too became the face of Indian ‘classical’ dance, the demand for mrdangams even quadrupled.

- Rajesh also spoke about how mrdangam makers are recruited at the government music colleges in Thiruvananthapuram, Thripunithura and Palakkad. Many who apply have no background in making. Since the examiners (typically, mrdangam artists) know very little about the making process, the selection is unfair and haphazard. While he was also making the point that preferential selections are made, Rajesh’s statement revealed that no senior mrdangam maker is ever an examiner, only mrdangam players. An appalling and painful state of affairs.

- There is only one overwhelming phenomenon in the history of mrdangam-making: Parlandu. For the makers’ community, he is that one universal reference. A person whom not just the makers but also the artists acknowledge as special, and the latter is significant. Only a few of the idols of any time truly endure, remaining relevant and influential long after they are gone. Although I found it baffling that all the musicians, including Mani Iyer’s children, who admired Parlandu for his workmanship, did not use the grammatical phrasing that implies respect. This separation between the professional and the individual is revealing.

  Living in a personal and social context where oppression was customary and rights non-existent, yet realising that he himself was special, and at the same time feeling honoured by his association with upper castes—all of these conflicting elements must have been emotionally draining and would have remained unresolved until the very end.

  These lines are constantly being redrawn by the powerful in an unrecognised casteist negotiation with the other side. Any perceived action that crosses the currently acceptable limits is put down to lack of respect and decorum.

---

